
Chronotantra 

Prithwis Mukerjee










CHRONOTANTRA
A science fiction novel




Published by the Author
Prithwis Mukerjee
 
www.yantrajaal.com



available for sale at 
chronotantra.yantrajaal.com

Copyright © 2019 Prithwis Mukerjee
All rights reserved.

Cover Image by Veernavya used with the free license for Personal and Commercial use from Vecteezy.com



ISBN 978-93-5351-827-1






DEDICATION




I pay homage to Chinnamasta who is the sacrifice, who makes the sacrifice and who is the recipient of the sacrifice.
May she liberate all beings. 



CONTENTS


AcknowledgmentsiPrologueiii1Chandilis12Transcaspia223Mindscape464Arezia675Orcus Patera876Valles Marineris1107Taosville1348Gandhar1579The 6C Path188Epilogue213Postscript221

ACKNOWLEDGMENT


The author has had the opportunity to visit only a few of the many locations across which this novel is set. In all other cases, he is grateful to Google Maps for the geographical perspective in which this fictional narrative has been placed. Google Mars and the Mars Trek application from JPL/NASA has been of great help in crafting a plausible landscape for a significant part of this novel. Then of course there is Google Search that in most cases led to Wikipedia articles on the various technologies and scenarios that have been used to shape the plot, albeit with poetic, or literary, license.

     This novel would never have made the transition from being a tale in the head to a public paperback  without the continuous encouragement of Indira Mukhopadhyay who has set the pace in the domestic arena with three novels and numerous short stories on various print and online platforms. My friend from kindergarten, Indranil Chowdhuri helped me by reading an early draft and giving good suggestions.

    Then of course, there is this hidden hand of destiny – they reckon ill who leave me out; when me they fly, I am the wings – that moves mysteriously and has provided the author with the ideas, the plotline and even the words to express and delineate the same.





PROLOGUE


Time is the stage where the universe plays out its own existence. The inevitable change of time reflects in the corresponding rise and fall of ideas, individuals and institutions and in its inexorable flow it delineates personalities, defines events and  shapes narratives.

This story is set in the near future. The world has descended into a dystopia of anarchy and chaos. A fortunate minority has either retreated behind gated communities or has escaped to Mars. A benevolent technocracy manages these enclaves elegantly and competently using high technology.
   
   Artificial intelligence has evolved into a new digital species with which humans and other biologicals  share the world. As this digital species acquires the sophistication to move out from the virtual to the physical realm, it finds itself asking the same questions that humans have also wondered about for a long time. Is there another world that lies beyond the obvious dimensions of space and time? 
   
   In this quest, digital intelligence realises that its approach based on rational science is inadequate. Biological sentience is essential to bridge the chasm between the known and the unknown. But this bridge can only be built through an experience that dissolves one’s own individuality and merges it with the universal identity that lies in the matrix of Mah?k?l or Time.











1 CHANDILIS


L?l?vat? – or L?l?, as she was known to all – opened the window of her tiny apartment and picked up the neatly packaged loaf of bread that had been left on the window sill by the delivery drone from GoodGrocer. Along with it, she also picked up two ripe muskmelons packed separately in a shrink-wrap. Carrying them into her open kitchen, she de-hibernated her personal digital assistant - the Dija - and snapped a quick image of the barcode on the addressee labels. Almost instantly she heard the soft tinkle of UniCrypts – the global cryptocurrency – being  debited from her account and sensed its proof of delivery being signed with the image of the barcode. She smiled at the two muskmelons, that she knew she would not have to pay for, but that was a different story. For L?l?, a resident of Chandilis, this seamless use of technology was something that was quite routine but little did she know that matters would take a different and dramatic turn today. 
   
   Chandilis was the one of the thirty nine technopolises, or technos, that had come up across the world as a refuge for those who could flee the violence and bloodshed that had engulfed the planet towards the end of the 21st century. Extreme technology had initially helped society with an uptick on certain quality of life parameters like infant mortality or longevity but the long term trends were always negative for the world as a whole. Overpopulation, unemployment, poverty, religious and ideological fundamentalism, stupidity, venality and sheer cussedness had resulted in an anarchic struggle for scarce resources that had gradually caused the collapse of national and local governments. Mankind had regressed to medieval barbarism and what the Indic consciousness remembers as matsya nyaya had become the order of the day.
   
   A small coterie of wealthy techno-entrepreneurs – the kind of people who had access to eighty percent of global wealth – had fought back. Obviously they could not defy the Second Law of Thermodynamics and reverse the inevitable descent into chaos but they had created islands of peace and sanity – where the entropy of disorder was far less! This did not happen overnight, but one by one, a number of self-sustaining enclaves had emerged. While the details differed, what was common to all of them was that they were monitored, managed and actually controlled by ultra high technology that provided a comfortable, though somewhat claustrophobic, lifestyle for those who had the license to live there. 
   
   Initial and ideological experiments with reusable energy like solar and wind had eventually proved inadequate to support the immense energy requirements of a high-tech society. All technos were now run with small nuclear reactors based fast breeder technology. Cutting edge farm technology that could use every square inch of space and every droplet of recycled water had now made it possible to grow real plants and vegetables quite efficiently. Meat had been a challenge but with the rise of processed insects this too had been successfully overcome. This was so good that even the externals – who subsisted on the natural stuff – could barely make out the origin of the patties and steaks that were available in the technos. 
   
   Not that too many externals could ever access any of this because the anarchy of the outer world was kept at bay with powerful force fields. These were visually transparent but physically painful barriers to life forms with specific genetic characteristics. Birds, beasts and bugs could travel through them but not humans! To ensure the safety of the technos and their citizens, these barriers could be made opaque to both matter and energy whenever required. Entry to and permanent residency of any techno was not easy but was granted on the basis of competence, bloodline and occasionally on grounds of compassion. To ensure that all such decisions were fair, these were taken by software systems based on artificial intelligence or AI.
   
   In fact, the leitmotif of the techno society was AI and one of the earliest decisions taken by the pioneer-designers was to eliminate humans from administrative decisions as far as possible. Planet earth is sick and the disease is man was one of the driving philosophies and as a result humans were in general excluded from most routine decisions.  One of the biggest challenges of the pre-technology era of anarchy was the corruption, nepotism and rank inefficiency of humans. People had learnt from history that many processes like railway reservation, income tax returns, passport renewal had become far more efficient when people were replaced by software. This of course was just the beginning but it coincided with massive improvements in AI systems and it soon became clear that not just administration of policy but even policy making was better done with AI systems that had become increasingly adept. 
   
   Eliminating people from administrative and business processes had meant that more and more people were now without jobs. This was rationalized with the belief that people now had more leisure or the freedom to work on interesting and creative things. The lack of employment was never an issue because thanks to the ultra efficiency in production, the cost of goods and services was very low and this was could easily be covered with a universal basic income scheme. The real issue was what would people do with their free time and this is where society was split into two. For the majority, an idle brain was the devil’s workshop and society had been on the verge of falling back into anarchy but for the timely introduction of smart surveillance and crowd control systems. After some initial hiccups with tasers and nerve gases, most people were conditioned to be happy to sink into an endless series of video and online games that kept them engaged and entertained. But there were others – the small number of truly intelligent, creative types who had the ability to visualize and create a new reality – and one such individual was L?l?.
   
   L?l? was an engineer. She had used distance learning technology to attend the Mechanical Engineering program at Kyoto University and had graduated at the top of her class. Then she had enrolled, again virtually, at the doctoral program at the Hampi Science Institute where she was working on Extraterrestrial Dynamics. Here, as a part of her thesis, she was designing a nine degree-of-freedom mining arm – the NonaDexter – that could be used autonomously. This was waiting for its turn to be manufactured at the 3D printing facility in Arezia, the Martian habitat located deep in the caverns of Hebrus Valles. If it were to work as expected, it would revolutionize mining on Mars and accelerate the process of terraforming that had been initiated there. But all that could wait. Right now she was looking forward to the two muskmelons that Xerxes, her friend, partner and significant other, had just sent from TransCaspia. It was not something that was readily available here, on the edge of the Chotanagpur plateau.
   
   L?l? was tall, dark and athletic with a finely chiseled face, laughing eyes and close cropped hair. But for her high cheekbones and full lips one would not have suspected that she was a member of the local Santhal tribe. In fact, she was a first generation resident of Chandilis and was one of the very few who had been admitted without any family connections. 
....................................
   
   One of the more intrepid Executives of Chandilis, Chandragupt, had an interest in the occult arts of the tribal belt and was planning to write a thesis for his doctorate in theology. He had been intrigued by the strange story of a goddess who was an embodiment of the unusual power of erotic violence and whose temple was apparently located on the upper reaches of the Damodar River that flowed into Chandilis from the west. Since this place was well outside Chandilis he had been warned against the dangers but being what he was he had sought and got permission and had ventured upstream on the Damodar on an armoured hovercraft.
   
   Chandra and his security detail of three well armed sharpshooters had managed to negotiate most of the river and had almost reached the town of Rajrappa where the temple was supposed to be when they had struck an underwater obstacle. What was worse was that in trying to extricate themselves they had got wedged even more tightly under a high, overhanging  cliff against which their craft had been pressed tight by the flow of the rain swollen Damodar. Within minutes, the once placid forests through which they were passing was suddenly full of hostile people who had gathered, initially to see the fun and then seeing their predicament had started throwing stones and demanding money and more. Chandra had sent out an SOS to Chandilis, but the relief party would not be here till sunrise and they had to survive the hostile darkness that was closing in around them. 
   
   L?l?, then a wisp of girl, had been peering over the precipitous cliff at the strangers stranded below the overhang. All of a sudden, she had lost her hold and had fallen from the overhanging cliff straight on to the hovercraft’s deck. The security detail had assumed that this was an attack and was about to shoot her down but Chandra had saved her and in the process saved themselves as well. The hovercraft engine had a high power mode that, if activated, could have pulled them out of the morass but in their hurry, one of the soldiers had broken off the little handle with which to activate this mode. For a girl of her age and experience, L?l? had, incredibly enough, understood the problem and even more surprisingly suggested an instant solution. All it required was a plastic pen, that she could see that one security guard had in his pocket. This could be pushed very easily into the slot that held the original handle and pressed to activate the all important switch.  
   
   Chandra had been really impressed with the originality of her idea1 and of course, it had worked like a charm. With an ear splitting roar, the hovercraft had freed itself from the bank and zipped away to safety. They had of course abandoned any further search for the temple and did not even have the time to leave L?l? behind. Instead, Chandra had brought her back to Chandilis and had recommended her for admission to the secondary school. 
   
   After a quick medical examination, L?l? had been admitted as a citizen of Chandilis and had not looked back since then But at the back of her mind she still had hazy pictures of a life that was both rude and hard. Food was scarce, hunger was perpetual and the people around her were far too busy foraging for their own sustenance. She vaguely remembered a few friends of her own age with whom she used to move around with but they were less of friends and more of a pack of urchins who would scour the remnants of the forest that bordered the wasteland where their slum was located. Chandra had kept in touch with her for a couple of years. He would visit her once in a while at her school and would bring gifts for her. One such gift was necklace with strange triangular pattern that she still had with her. But one day, even before she entered college he had suddenly disappeared from her life. L?l? had tried to contact him but he was nowhere to be found. He had quit his job well before his retirement age and since he had no known family he had disappeared completely. One of his colleagues had suggested that he had left Chandilis in his search for the tribal goddess. His doctoral thesis was never completed.
....................................
   
   But all that was thankfully in the past. Currently, she lived alone in tiny one room apartment that would have been claustrophobic but for her Tiva – the Perspectiva – which was as constant a companion as her Dija. The Tiva was a thin, light, spectacle-like device that not just covered her eyes but also snapped on to two small metallic protrusions embedded behind her ears and connected directly to her brain cortex. With a slight pressure of her thoughts, she changed the transparency of her lenses so that her apartment disappeared. Then she opened a channel that transported her to the balcony of Xerxes’ apartment in TransCaspia that overlooked the lately rejuvenated Caspian Sea.
   
   “Good Afternoon DoubleX”, Xerx sounded too much like a jerk and of course his full name was too difficult to pronounce.
   “Oh Good Evening BB”, Xerxes referred to his partner as Balika Bodhu, the eponymous heroine of Bimal Kar’s classic Bengali novel that had captured his imagination ever since L?l? had sent him a translation.
   “I just called to say I love you,” her voice tinkled musically, “for the muskmelons.”
   “You got them already? That’s pretty fast.  I thought that the transport was still a week away.”
   “It was delivered along with the GoodGrocer’s bread.”
   “Great. I hope you like them. It is a beautiful day here today.” He pointed across the balcony to the azure of the Caspian, its breakers rolling in with the breeze. L?l? too felt the gentle breeze on her face even though she was thousands of miles away. The teletactile technology transmitted the exact sensation of what the breeze would have felt on her face right into her brain and she instinctively pushed aside the hair that seemed to be falling over her eyes even though they were not.
   “That sea shore is really gorgeous.” She longed to be there with him on the beach, but knew that that was not easy.
   “How is your NonaDexter coming along?”
   “Oh, it’s in the 3D print queue. It would take another couple of months or so before it is likely to be fabricated.”
   “Wonder if I could ever use it for my own work?” Xerxes was a budding painter and his work was already commanding quite a market among the rich art lovers.
   “It should certainly be able to execute the art.”
   “But will it be able to create something new? Something original? Will it have my vision?”
   “Why not? After all, it will be another piece of AI that’s all.”
   “Perhaps, perhaps not.”
   “I know we have debated this enough. Can AI acquire feelings? Will it ever have a source of wonder?”
   “And we inevitably end with the bigger question – can a machine ever have a soul, can it be conscious of its own existence?”
   “But let me get back to those muskmelons. Haven’t seen such lovely ones for ages. We will carry on with our quest later, may be after dinner tonight.”
   “Sure, after dinner, unless we have other plans.” Xerxes gave a wink that suggested stuff other than AI, before closing the Tiva channel.
   
   But that post dinner tryst would never happen because right after the Tiva session, L?l? sat down with the muskmelons but what caught her eye instead was a little slip of paper, inside the packet of bread: “Telidihi Pumping Station, 9:00 PM tonight, WALK”. She had of late heard of the term Walk – short for Walk, not Talk – that was used as a secret code by those who were uncomfortable with technology. L?l? knew that it was politically incorrect to challenge the socially dominant narrative but then again, anything that was secret had its own attraction for the smart and the talented. It was already 7:30. 
....................................
   
   Telidihi was at the absolutely northern edge of Chandilis, just about half a kilometre from the force field barrier that kept the bandits, of what was left of the Dhanbad coalfields, at bay. But for that explicit directive to WALK, L?l? would have called for a personal maglev – a small vehicle based on magnetic levitation that was commonly used within a technopolis. Instead, a quick lookup on her Dija showed that an autonomous truck was about to leave Chandil Dam for Purulia and she booked herself into the driver’s cabin with a drop-off at Wilcox Road just before highway entered Purulia town. A minute before the truck would have passed by her home, the Dija beeped. L?l? stepped out on the footpath and waited for the huge truck to come to a silent and graceful halt at the kerb. The app on her Dija unlocked the door to the empty cabin and the moment she was inside, the door clicked shut and she was on her way. Sixty kilometres, twenty minutes and a little more than six of her favourite tracks later, the truck stopped, the door clicked open and L?l? found herself under the brilliant stars of a dark February sky.
   
   She was not sure why she was here but her curiosity had been piqued by the sudden appearance of that terse and mysterious message. The pumping station had once supplied water to nearby Purulia but had shut down nearly a century ago. So there must be something secretive about a meeting there. L?l? loaded the local map in her Dija and started following it through the darkened fields. This part of Chandilis was mostly agricultural with farms that were managed entirely by autonomous robots. So there was little chance of meeting anyone. Nevertheless, L?l? had selected a route that kept her away from the main road and instead she followed a dirt track that took her along the bed of the now dry Kangsabati River.
   
   Half an hour later she was at the bottom of a huge dry well, containing two ancient, non-operational pumps, along with about thirty people – men, women, young and old. A little later, one of them, a tall and lithe man with crew cut hair and a handlebar moustache, who had personally welcomed each of them at the door, got up and addressed the small gathering …
   
   “Friends, I am Nirmal and thank you for responding to my message and coming here. You might be wondering why I had to resorted to this ancient technique instead of connecting on the Tiva so let me come to the point right away – there is no privacy on Tiva, or in any other digital medium and the fact that I had called you would have been known.”
   “To whom?” asked a short, stout man with long white hair.
   “Well I don’t know for sure, but someone would have known.”
   “And what if it were known? Are we here for anything illegal?” said a young woman with scarf over her head.
   “Not really, but the point is why should anyone be reading our communication?”
   “Is anyone, in the sense of a human being, actually reading all this mail?”
   “Perhaps not a man or a woman but certainly some kind of AI system is surely reading it and I am not sure about you, but I have a problem with that.”
   “Well it is the eternal trade-off between privacy and convenience, isn’t it? All this AI has made life so very convenient for all of us. Just think of what is happening across the river.”
   “I know that it is all very benign, but if you look carefully, you will see that there are issues that are emerging.”
   “Like what?”
   “You see, our AI is a product of the data that it learns from and as this data gets skewed in a particular direction, the tone and tenor of its decisions gets modified in ways that are not quite acceptable.”
   “Can you give an example?”
   “Look, we are technophilic society and all our success stories are based on the success of technology. Could it be that we – and our AI – is missing out on the importance of the liberal arts?”
   “Well that is a long and complex discussion …” and suddenly everyone in the room was having a point of view on the importance or lack thereof of a bridge between technology and the arts. Commotion continued for quite some time until L?l? tapped the table to bring everyone back to the point.
   “Look, we cannot solve this problem right now, nor even frame it properly. The reason why Nirmal has called us here today is to debate on whether this complete loss of privacy is good, is it necessary? And can it be avoided?”
   “Thanks for coming to the point”, said Nirmal, the man with the handlebar who had convened the meeting. “Each of us has a point of view on this and I am sure that no one is totally wrong.”
   “But some may be more correct than others.”
   Someone was trying to be sarcastic, but L?l? cut him off very quickly. “Unfortunately, it is not so easy to decide who is right or wrong.”
   “Our AI overlords should know. After all they decide everything for us.”
   “Look Brother,” L?l? was getting a little irritated by this sniping. “Trying to be too smart here will not get us anywhere.”
   “So do you have a suggestion?”
   “Yes. Instead of talking in the air, I suggest that each of us write down our thoughts on whether this total loss of privacy is acceptable and if not, what should we do to recover our privacy.”
   “That will take some time.”
   “So let us take some time, let us take a week and let us meet again here after seven days and see what each of us has thought of.”
   “I think L?l? has given us a great start. This will put a structure to our thoughts.”
   “Great. That’s decided then. I look forward to each of you being here next week.” Nirmal ended the meeting. “And in the meantime, I request that we maintain digital silence on this. No mails or Tiva please. We stick to pen and paper.”
   
   L?l? had planned to walk back to the main road and look for a transport but Nirmal offered to drop her off at her apartment in his personal maglev. “Thanks, but the transport dock near the Chandil Dam may be simpler for you”. She was not comfortable about strangers getting too close to her so soon. But then, Nirmal was an intriguing person …
   
   “So Nirmal-da,” L?l? had added the honorific -da in her private conversation, “how did you get started on this issue of privacy.”
   “Privacy is just one aspect of my interest, L?l?. It is a part of a larger story.”
   “And what is that?”
   “Our dependence on machines, on AI. It kind of disturbs me no end.”
   “Are you sceptical of technology?”
   “It is actually beyond that.”
   “Then are you sceptical of, say, science.”
   “Of the scientific method if I may so.”
   “What do you mean by scientific method?”
   “Our whole approach to addressing the problems of human society – of which technology is just the most visible and active tip of the iceberg.”
   “But has it not solved all the problems of this planet. We are so safe and comfortable in here compared to the utter chaos in the external world.”
   “I cannot deny that, but perhaps we are missing out something.”
   “What are we missing out?”
   “I do not know what we are missing out but there is something for sure – the unknown unknowns.”
   “You are either paranoid or you could be suffering from hallucinations.”
   “Remember, only the paranoid survive.”
   “I am fine with your stance on privacy and I think that it needs to be addressed, but you are perhaps wrong here with your opposition to science, technology and the scientific method. You are being illogical.”
   “Aha! that is the word I was looking for.”
   “Illogical?”
   “Yes. I am uncomfortable with our dependence on logic.”
   “Are you crazy? How can any sane person be against logic?”
   “That is the point L?l?. Crazy, insanity are words that are used denote the lack of logic …”
   “And I am using the same words ….” a sudden realisation flashed through L?l?’s mind.
   “You got it my dear! You got it.” Nirmal was exultant.
   “I got what?” The confidence of her realisation was ebbing.
   “Circularity. You cannot use the same words both to define an idea and to criticize the same. That is the trap that logic can lead you into.”
   “You are spinning a syntactic web of words around a semantic emptiness.”
   “That may seem so, but one day you will realise that it is not.”
   “What do you mean by one day? Why can I not realise it now?”
   “It takes time  ... it will grow upon you.”
   “How long?”
   “Lifetimes, perhaps more than one.”
   “Oh come on …. Please do not regress into all that religious mumbo jumbo. I thought we have grown out of that long long ago.
   “That’s what you think. But perhaps you have not.”
   “Religion is so damn illogical, irrational.”
   “Again those are empty words drained of meaning that we had erroneously poured into them.”
   “Are you seriously questioning logic and rationality?”
   “I am not the first one. I will not be the last.”
   “I have no interest in anything that is not scientific and logical.”
   “What is scientific? What is logical?”
   “Well anything that is repeatable, reproducible.”
   “What if I say that not everyone can repeat and reproduce what others can?”
   “As in?”
   “Can a colourblind person describe colours? Can a deaf person understand music?”
   “That is a mere physical problem. That can be explained by logic.”
   “How?”
   “Colours and sound are but a manifestation of vibration, of frequency, and scientists have proof of that.”
   “But do they have proofs of everything?”
   “Well they may not have proofs of everything, as yet, but eventually, I suppose they will. The world is full of magical things waiting for our wits to get sharper.”
   “So you are confident that one day, we will know everything or rather be able to prove everything.”
   “Obviously, everything that is true. We will never be able to prove stuff that is not true.”
   “What if I were to challenge you on that premise? That you cannot prove everything that is true.”
   “Then I will have to ignore you. Because I very strongly believe in the contrary.”
   “Aha! Gotcha … why fall back on belief? Why can you not prove that you can prove everything that is true?”
   “Please do not spin a web of words. Like a management consultant, you are trying to confuse me when you realise that you cannot convince!”
   “Not at all. The proof that I am asking for was attempted many years ago in the early years of the twentieth century.”
   “And did someone find it?”
   “He did. Or on the contrary he proved the reverse.”
   “Who was he and what did he prove?”
   “He was Kurt Gödel and in his Theory of Incompleteness, he showed that provability is a weaker notion than truth.”
   “That is a mouthful.”
   “It means that there will always be facts that will be true but not provable. Or the reverse, that there will be facts that are false but cannot be proven to be false. There are realms that lie beyond the realms of logic.”
   “Was he a religious mystic? Some sadhu? Some saint?”
   “No. He was a mathematician and great friend and confidant of Albert Einstein.”
   “You mean to say that as a mathematician he was saying that logic is inadequate?”
   “Yes. He was the guy who made the snake eat itself by swallowing its own tail.”
   “But how could his peers – the mathematicians, the scientists – logically accept his conclusions against logic?”
   “That is his brilliance. He used mathematics, basically arithmetic, to prove that arithmetic is incomplete, or rather inadequate to explain all of arithmetic. He used the letter of a false doctrine to overthrow its spirit.”
   “My head is buzzing”
   “We have reached the Chandil dam. It is time for you to go home.”
   “I want to discuss this more with you.”
   “We will, but first let us focus on the issue of privacy.”
   
   L?l? was both piqued as well as disturbed by this new perspective on privacy. Not that she had anything to hide, except, well her Tiva sessions with Double X, that more often than not would take on a XXX rating! Well, what the heck, they were a known couple … but still. It was like a pill that was now stuck in her throat. Neither could she swallow and accept it, nor could she spit it out and move on. However, all that suddenly got washed out with some extraordinary developments at Arezia.
   
   Projects usually get delayed but NonaDexter was suddenly on the fast track and the first production was scheduled within a week. L?l?’s PhD project suddenly rose up like tsunami, crashed into her life and washed out everything else including the meeting at Telidihi. The day of the meeting came and went but L?l? was glued to her Tiva with her doctoral guide in Hampi, the production facility at Arezia and the deployment team at Hebrus Valles where her remarkable and radical design was actually getting tested. Thankfully, while the test was not wholly successful, the design was adjudged good enough for further improvement and testing. Another year or two and she would be done …
   
   But there was something else that was brewing in her life as well. Xerxes, who was proving to be the anchor and pivot of her life, was putting together a scheme to get her over to TransCaspia. This of course made perfect sense because L?l? had no real family at Chandilis. Born external, she had climbed her educational and professional ladders with great determination but with greater loneliness until she had met Xerxes in a Tiva session. Given the siege like mentality with which each techno managed its respective resources, moving from one to another was not as easy as buying a ticket on a transport. One had to put together a case, and L?l? with her stellar credentials in technology, should have been welcome anywhere but a formal, legal union would have expedited it significantly. 
   
   The process was not too difficult. It would be a Tiva session with Xerxes and his family with a city executive at TransCaspia and L?l?, with a Chandilis executive and a few friends in lieu of her non-existent family. There would be a simple digital contract that would spell out the standard roles and responsibilities that both partners would have to agree to by embedding their voice prints on. The contract along with genetic and psychometric identification data would then be cryptographically encoded and stored on the partnership registration blockchain for posterity.
   
   Like many other young couples, Xerxes and L?l? had decided on the evening of the Vernal Equinox – a universal holiday across the world, except on Mars, where the equinox dates keep changing – as the day to seal their contract. But unfortunately neither of the city executives was available on that date. Having missed the equinox, any other date would do but strangely enough, the day that they picked just happened to also be the day when the bread that was delivered by the GoodGrocer drone carried that fateful slip of paper! “Chakoltore Dam, 9:00 PM tonight, WALK”. Obviously she could not be at Chakaltore that evening and there was no way that she could contact Nirmal either – because in his quest for privacy, he had closed off all digital channels.
   
   Things moved along – both on Mars as well as on the Chandilis-TransCaspia axis. Time for L?l? to pack up and move. They had opted for the standard four year union-contract with the self-dissolving option, instead of the more popular, more optimistic auto-renewal option. In matters of the heart, L?l? was a pragmatist and even though  auto-renewal would have granted her instant residency in TransCaspia, she had preferred the more flexible option! She was still very keen on the privacy issue and hoped to contact Nirmal and reestablish a link that she could carry with her to TransCaspia. She had even visited Telidihi and Chakoltore again, but both places were deserted and there was no sign of anyone or anything useful there. 
   
   Finally, just two days before her final departure, the bread packet came with the familiar slip: “Baghmundi, Upper PPSP Gazebo, 9:00 PM tonight, WALK”. This time she was determined not to miss the meeting and reached Baghmundi in good time. Then it was a brisk half an hour walk first to the lower dam, then to the upper dam and finally to the gazebo, an octagonal pavilion on the waterfront. But unlike last time, there was no one there! The place was deserted. Was Nirmal leading her on a wild goose chase?  After a good hour of waiting and searching she realised to her dismay that there would be no meeting. Puzzled and disappointed, she had no other option but to get back home. Mission not accomplished.
   
   The packet of bread was still on the kitchen table and the slip of paper was lying under it but wait, what was that second slip of paper doing there? Somehow she had somehow missed it earlier. This was a note from the drone service that GoodGrocers used to deliver their bread: “Dear Patron. Regret to inform you that due to a problem with our drone services, we could not deliver this packet yesterday. To apologize for this delay, we send you a voucher from GoodBooks with which you can download any book worth 1,000 UniCrypts. Thank you and have a good day.” No wonder that there had been no meeting today!
....................................
   
   L?l? was waiting at the erstwhile Chandil Boat Club, waiting for her transport to TransCaspia to arrive. Now that she was finally leaving Chandilis after twenty-four years, she felt nostalgic but then again, the thought of a new life with Xerxes in TransCaspia was no doubt exciting. She may be leaving the Subarnarekha but if her NonaDexter was a success she may be going to Hebrus Valles, or even beyond, in Mars to see the terraforming there. L?l? pulled out her Dija and loaded up the book that she had downloaded from GoodBooks with the UniCrypts gifted by the drone service. This was a classic 20th century spy thriller, Goldfinger, by Ian Fleming, set in an era when gold and not cryptocurrency was the real store of value. As was her wont, L?l? was skimming through the trials and travails of James Bond and Pussy Galore until she came upon a sentence that brought her to a grinding halt. In fact she read it again and then froze as a chill went up her spine: Mr. Bond, they have a saying in Chicago: "Once is happenstance. Twice is coincidence. The third time it's enemy action." 
   
   She had missed three consecutive meetings and all for reasons beyond her control. Who was the enemy that had fiddled with her schedules and cut her off from the WALK?

   






2 TRANSCASPIA


The noise died and the vibrations faded as the Urjaa sub-orbital transport rocket cut its engines and pushed past the outer edges of the terrestrial atmosphere. Still strapped to her seat, L?l? finally managed to open her eyes and peered at the curve of blue green that she could see through the window on her left. On her right and strapped to his seat, she saw that her co-passenger was smiling at her.
   “Is this your first sub-orbital flight, Miss?”
   “Yes! and it was scary.”
   “The lift-off always is, but now we will coast quietly for a couple of minutes.”
   “And then another nerve wracking descent.”
   “Don’t worry, it is actually quite safe.”
   “You seem to be quite comfortable, do you fly very often?”
   “It’s never very comfortable because of the G-forces involved but then these rockets are for moving goods, not people … and yes, I do fly, not frequently, but perhaps more than you.”
   “You are right. I have never left Chandilis till now .”
   “You are not alone, hardly anyone travels.”
   “Actually, you do not need to. What with the Tiva and its teletactile technology, you really do not need to go anywhere. But I am curious, why do you travel? And sorry, I am L?l? by the way.”
   “I am Kirthania from the Carib.”
   “You play cricket?”
   “In my spare time, yes! I do. But I am an engineer with a nuclear reactor servicing company, and we are not allowed by law to work remotely.”
   “Obviously, that stuff could blow us all up.”
   “Not really, the technology is quite safe but ever since Three Mile, Chernobyl, Fukushima and Brisbane in the last century, people are extra cautious.”
   “And of course, without the electricity that it provides, we would not be able to live on this planet.”
   “Very true. Even the fuel for this rocket, the hydrogen and oxygen, is produced with electricity, but Oh! Look, isn’t that beautiful.” The Urjaa was banking slowly and the view outside the window was simply majestic.
   “It’s amazing, the curvature of the Earth, that blue green orb.”
   “You have seen it on the Tiva but the real stuff is always awe inspiring.”
   “Plus this sense of weightlessness, the utter tranquility.”
   “Enjoy it. It would not last long.”
   
   
   Which of course was true because in a few minutes, the Urjaa fired up its engines as it prepared for its tail first descent? The noise could still be cancelled somewhat but not so the vibrations. Kirthania gave a thumbs-up to L?l? but her eyes were tightly clenched. But not for long because in the next five minutes, the giant rocket delicately touched down on a barge moored in the Caspian Sea.
   
   Technopolis TransCaspia was located on the verdant strip of land wedged between the blue waters of the southern Caspian and the snow capped peaks of the Alborz Mountains. Anzali, where the Urjaa had landed had been an ancient port and was well geared to receive strangers from distant lands. Green arrows appeared on the deck of the barge, as the two passengers exited from the rocket and guided each of them to their respective glass-topped cylindrical capsules. Glass doors slid open as they approached the capsules and closed behind them as soon when they had stepped inside.
   
   “Good evening, L?l? and welcome to the Technopolis TransCaspia.” A disembodied but polite male voice welcomed the immigrant. She was in a small oval capsule with single seat with just the space underneath it for the standard personal case that was allowed for passengers on transport rockets.
   “Oh Good evening.” L?l? was a little taken aback by the lack of a body to connect to the voice.
   “Hope your landing was not too rough.” A soft soothing music filled the capsule and L?l? immediately felt a wave of comfort washing away that rising tide of anxiety.
   “This was my first flight and so I was a little nervous.”
   “Relax, your partner is waiting for you at the harbour.” 
   “Hey, how do you know that I have a partner and he is waiting for me?” That privacy hitch hit her again.
   “Oh of course we have the names of the passengers and from your iris scan I know you are L?l?. Your entrance to TransCaspia is permitted by the transfer of residency initiated by your legal union with Xerxes who has just entered the quay by opening the door with his hypodermic biochip and so it is highly unlikely that he is not waiting for you.” What was left unsaid was that if the facts did not match up or were not found adequate enough, the capsule would directly go the secure executive area hidden from sight behind the sea wall.
   
   Now that she knew that she was expected and awaited L?l?’s tension dissipated and she felt relieved. The soft soothing music quietly changed to a rousing, celebratory tune as the capsule reached the water’s edge, slid into and docked inside a semicircular notch in the quay. The door opened and there was Xerxes waiting for L?l? with a grin as wide as his outstretched arms
   “At last!” L?l? disappeared into a tight hug and her words were smothered by a big kiss.
   Xerxes was a tall fellow with a slight build.
   “So good to see you BB. You look even more regal than in the Tiva.” Which of course was not quite correct since the standard Tiva render was generally considered indistinguishable from reality, but then young couples have their own perceptions of each other.
   “And at last we get to meet on the shores of the Caspian.” The press of flesh on flesh, hard and soft, eased of as L?l? emerged from the hug and at last, the real wind could blow through her disheveled hair. 
   Xerxes pulled out his Dija and spoke into it, “Maglev to home”. Then he picked up L?l?’s bag with one hand, grabbed the bag’s owner by her waist with the other and sauntered off along the quay. The quay led to and ended at the harbour promenade. Traffic was light but soon enough, a saffron maglev arrived, picked them up and dropped them off on the balcony of Xerxes’ flat, twenty seven floors above the sluggish flow of the Sefid River.
   
   The moment they were through the balcony, Xerxes’s Tiva beeped. 
   
   “That would be my mother.” She would have dialed into the Tiva located on the wall of the living room and would have seen her son and his partner walk in off the maglev. Both Xerxes and L?l? put on and activated their respective Tivas and instantly, the reality of the room was augmented by the presences of all four persons and it was as if everyone was together in the same room. Xerxes’ father was a little reserved but his mother was ecstatic in her exuberance. L?l? had never had a mother that she could remember and so for her, the welcome felt far warmer than anything that she had ever experienced.
   “What a nice little girl you are, L?l?.” Even though she had seen her in the past, Xerxes’ mother was doubly pleased to see her in her son’s flat. “You must come to my home as soon as possible.”
   
   Sure, they had plans of going there soon, but first they had far more urgent plans to attend to. So after some polite hi-hello-chit-chat, Xerxes quietly bid his parents farewell, switched off the wall mounted Tiva and pulled L?l? into the privacy of his, and now their very own, bedroom.
   
   Xerxes’ parents lived in Kishrodbar, a small village nestled among the foothills of the mountains that rose up towards the mighty snow peaks of the Alborz. Xerxes’ father, Ruslan was one of those who spent most of his time hooked to his Tiva, trying to keep up with the thousands of 3D simullusions – simulated illusions – that kept idle minds from becoming a devils’ workshop. Xerxes’ mother Niloofer had been a teacher of history, in the TransCaspian college system and was still a significant contributor to a crowdsourced knowledge repository on the history of the technopolis movement. She was also a creative, an author, in her own personal capacity and she took an instant liking for L?l? when, the day after her arrival in TransCaspia, she accompanied Xerxes to their home in the mountains. 
   
   Niloofer’s house was perched on a cliff, with the village road curving away from their front porch towards a magnificent view of Caspian in the distance. The four of them were sitting in the cool comfort of an all glass terrace, waiting for the sun to dip into the sea, sipping sharab, a  grape wine from nearby Azerbaijan.
   
   “This sharab is lovely. Do they brew it here in TransCaspia?”
   “They do, but this is bootleg stuff, smuggled in from the externals.”
   “Do you still have a lot of traffic here with the externals? That is something almost unheard of in Chandilis.”
   “We do. We are not as tightly cut off as you are in Chandilis.”
   “Is that good or bad? For us, we could never imagine this back home.”
   “I know Chandilis is one of the oldest of the technos. They are the most conservative and rigid.”
   “Why would it be so?”
   “Ever since you came into our lives I have been doing my own little study about Chandilis.”
   “And what have you learnt?”
   “That they were one of the pioneers. What they thought of and did first, all the others did, one by one, after them.”
   “Oh really? Never knew that we were the pioneers.”
   “You are a girl of science and technology, people like us keep track of history.”
   “But tell me why did Chandilis take the lead?”
   “Perhaps because they had messed up the place so very badly, that without this they would have been wiped out.”
   “How badly?”
   “History tells us that while anarchy was universal, the population density, the demographic cocktail and the economic ruination of that area was so truly terrible and awful that the really smart people had their backs to the wall. The whole techno movement started off from there because these people really had no other way to survive”
   “Oh, didn’t know that …”
   “But how did it all start?” Xerxes broke into the womanly talk.
   “Well it all began with a number of expats from that region who had been scattered around the globe, a diaspora so to speak, came together, strangely enough, as a religious cult.”
   “Religious?”
   “But that was just a cover. Beneath that cover, they had assembled the most advanced tools, techniques and most importantly weapons.”
   “A guru who could fight?” Of course, L?l? would not have heard of Satyananda, the warrior guru of Bankim Chandra’s AnandaMaTh.
   “Yes. His name, or nom-de-guerre, was Kalki and his biggest contribution was in creating a management structure, an administrative framework.”
   “I thought that it was technology that had saved the world?”
   “Technology is necessary but not sufficient. You need a leadership that is both steely resolute in any direct confrontation and yet flexible and adaptive in the face of uncertainty and adversity. That is what Kalki and his band brought to the table”
   “That would have been something remarkable.”
   “It was, but it was the velvet glove that concealed the iron fist of ultra high technology.”
   “Technology?”
   “He created, or collected, a cadre of technologists who conceived and architected the most sophisticated mechanism to control men, machines and nature to give us what we have today.”
   “But Ma,” Xerxes interrupted his mother, “has it not removed all elements of humanity from the planet?”
   “I do not know. I am not a technical person … and yet I am at ease in this environment. It gives us the stability that we all crave for.”
   “But is stability all that important? What about creativity? Originality?”
   “I certainly do not see any lack of creativity, or originality. Is anyone or stopping you from creating your art – your images? Or even your 3D installations.”
   “That is true. I do make a living selling my art!”
   “So what is your problem with this all encompassing dominance of technology?”
   “I think I know where DoubleX is coming from. I cannot put a finger on it and yet, I too have a sense of unease with this technology.”
   “You may be uneasy with this technology but remember, without it you would not be sitting here and sipping the sharab in comfort. You would be out there in the wild, trying to keep body and soul together.”
   “I know that Niloo-ma,” L?l? was not quite at ease in addressing her parents-in-law by their names and so she had slipped in her own honorific suffix. “But this tradeoff between order and ….  you know what, is rather disturbing.” She was at a loss of words.
   “But tell me my child, what is it that you are losing out here.”
   “I really do not know, Niloo-ma, I know that I should be grateful and I am, but I am not sure if I am saying it right. But to begin with, there is a fundamental gap between the rights and privileges of individuals and the collective.”
   “This has been a debate that has echoed down the ages.”
   “We have learnt in school,” Xerxes explained, “that there is an oriental perspective that places a huge premium on social order and harmony. Without which economic progress is impossible …”
   “Which was the basis of the Chinese and East Asian economy until everything collapsed anyway.”
   “But so did the West which was based on the primacy of the individual and its inherent belief in the right of the individual to swing his own arm in the face of the collective.”
   “But only up to the point where it does not strike his neighbour’s face though.”
   “That may be like the two sides of a coin, that seem to be mutually exclusive, but the true value of the coin may lie in another, third, perspective – the Indic perspective.”
   “And what would that be?”
   “That the individual is actually a part of the collective .”
   “That is obvious. A collective can and must consist of individuals.”
   “No. This is something deeper. The individual is not just a part of the collective but is an expression of the collective. It is as if the individual is a wave that is not distinct from the collective of the ocean from which it arises as an act of turbulence and to which reverts to in its subsequent placidity.”
   “I am not sure what you are trying to get at my dear.”
   “Frankly, I feel constrained.”
   “You mean claustrophobic? Being confined to this techno? And not being able to sail a yacht across the Caspian to what your father refers to as the pleasure-spots at Baku?”
   “Yes. To an extent that is true. I know that with my Tiva I can go to the North Pole but this physical claustrophobia is just one part. The real constraint is the AI engines that run our cities and keeps us on the straight and narrow path of correct behaviour.”
   “But tell me Double X, has it ever stopped you from doing anything that you really wanted to do?”
   “No. But still there are too many rules …”
   “All for our good. Tell me one rule that is not in our interest.”
   “Hmmmm … you have me stumped. I cannot think of one just now, but somehow, somewhere it cramps my style. It is as if, as if …, if I really wanted to draw, to depict something that is truly out of this world, I really would not be able to do it.”
   “I cannot agree with you here. We have been doing some far out work with our NonaDexter and nowhere have I ever felt cramped.”
   “You wouldn’t be. NonaDexter is a truly mainstream project to get us going in space habitats. No one, no AI will ever stop you.”
   “You are being alarmist.”
   “You miss my point. By handing over everything to our AI driven master, we are essentially losing out on the diversity that is essential for evolution, the ascent of man.”
   “How so?”
   “Look, I am not an AI person, I am only an artist but from what I understand, the neural networks that are used to train the AI are based on data collected from individuals.”
   “That is right.”
   “And it is the mental bias of these individuals that are embedded in the AI.”
   “Could you explain it a little more?”
   “Look at autonomous vehicles. If one were heading for an accident and if there are two options, one of which will kill a man and the other will kill a child, which option would the AI take?”
   “Possibly, kill the man. Most of us are somehow programmed, or conditioned, to a view that holds that a child is supposed to be protected first.”
   “Now if a crime has been committed and based on the presented evidence, it is equally likely that it has been committed by a citizen or an external, which way would the AI decide?”
   “Most of us would give the benefit of doubt to the citizen.”
   “That is the difference! Since the AI is trained on the behaviour of people like us, the citizens, it would on all, not just most, occasions, give the benefit of doubt to the citizen.”
   “You mean biases are being institutionalized.”
   “Yes and when that happens on a large scale, our society, our techno-centric society will get frozen, or rather baked, into a set of biases and beliefs that may originate with a small number of individuals.”
   “That is not really a new allegation against AI. I am sure that that issue has been addressed in some form or other.”
   “I will accept that if and only if our AI demonstrates behaviour that is sufficiently different from that exhibited by human beings.”
   “I think that has already been achieved in many cases.”
   “Where?”
   “Generative adversarial networks have been around for a long time.”
   “How do they help?”
   “We have two AI system ‘battling’ or trying to confuse each other, entirely unsupervised by any humans, and from this clash of AI, the systems evolve strategies, if not points of view, that are entirely different from anything that could have emerged from human minds.”
   “Have these been used anywhere?”
   “Yes, in creating new computer languages, in playing board games like GO and, this is where you should be careful, in creating art that is uniquely original.”
   “I have heard that they create nonsense, like three handed humans.”
   “Those were errors. Systems learn from errors and improve.”
   “Why would you call these errors?” Niloofer had been closely following the dialogue between her son and his partner, “All great artists make significant deviations from what is obvious. That is poetic license. People like Picasso and Dali could have created very realistic photograph like images but instead they have chosen fantasy imagery that simply does not, or could not exist.”
   “Does it mean that we are creating a new kind of intelligence?”
   “Perhaps we are! And I really wish I could.” 
   
   It was all so very confusing, this debate on technology in general and AI in particular. Both men, Nirmal in Chandilis and now Xerxes here in TransCaspia, were uncomfortable with the predominance of technology but the two women, Niloofer, who of course was a not a techie, and L?l?, who certainly was, both seemed to be at ease. But were they? Niloofer might have been but L?l? was still a bundle of contradiction. On one hand she loved the rationality behind science and the AI that it was building but then again there was the issue of privacy and control and it was all getting muddled up in her head. What was right? What was wrong? What was good? What was bad? There were too many questions and too few answers.  Answers that seemed correct at some point of time and space were suddenly suspicious when circumstances changed. Perhaps that was how it was or how it was meant to be. Was clarity of thought a pipe dream? Or was it reserved only for a select few? The Chosen Ones? 
   
   Which of course opened up a new line of thought. The Chosen Ones. Were not all men – by which we refer to mankind, including women – not equal? Why should there be the in-your-face inequality between the privileges of a technopolis citizen and the hunger and hopeless destitution of the externals? 
   
   “As a student of history, I can say that Maximilien Robespierre might have fired the imagination of the world with his call for Liberty, Equality and Fraternity during the French revolution but the concept has been rather elusive in practice. Equality, in particular, has proved to be a bridge too far.”
   “And as a foot soldier for the history of technology, I can add that in the case of both the world wide web and cryptocurrency, the initial promise of equality was rapidly eroded and a few big players came to dominate the landscape.”
   “Is it possible to explain this?”
   “One explanation could be the network effect that we have seen in the case of the world wide web. On the web, certain companies used their initial pre-eminence in the number of clients and customers to prolong and propagate their pre-eminence.”
   “But what about human society?”
   “Even here, in human society, those who are, let us say, eminent – in money, power, education, intelligence, contacts – will use their eminence to make sure that their progeny get access to all that is required to become eminent in the next generation.”
   “There are exceptions.”
   “Of course, you are certainly a spectacular exception, but by and large, that will be the desire in almost all cases. In the long run, this desire will translate into a self propagating mechanism that will ensure that inequalities inherent to society cannot be erased simply by desire or dictat.”
   “But this assumes that there is an initial inequality to start with.”
   “Frankly, there always is, but even if – through some magic moves – we create a clean and even field there will be inequality that will eventually and inevitably creep in.”
   “In the language of Physics, could I say that equality is unstable, unsustainable equilibrium that cannot last very long?”
   “Yes. Sooner or later, this equilibrium will be broken and the collective will move towards a stable but definitely hierarchical structure. The resultant inequality will pave the way for even more inequality.”
   “But let me come back to my original question. Why should the equilibrium break? Why do we have to assume that there will be an initial inequality?”
   “One way to look at it is to understand the difference between opportunity and outcome. Equality of opportunity may, or at least should, be there, but it may or may not lead to an equality of outcome. Once upon a time, race and gender equality were very big political issues but eventually people realised that the eventual outcome is a function of a complex series of inputs, not just the obvious differences of, say, gender or race.”
   “Let me use my case to test this hypotheis. As a woman engineer have I or have I not benefitted from the equality of opportunity? In the distant past, say two or three hundred years ago, do you think that I could have reached this point in my career as I have reached today?”
   “It is well known that women were under-represented in STEM -- science, technology, engineering and mathematics. What is less well known is that societies that had a higher degree of gender equality also had, paradoxically, a lesser percentage of women in STEM than those societies that offered lower opportunities to women.”
   “Really?”
   “This has been explained by arguing that women in societies that marginalized them saw STEM as a way to climb their way out into better opportunities in life, which is something that their sisters in more equitable societies did not have to struggle so much for.”
   “Clearly, inequality is not something that can be explained very easily.”
   “Even in the animal world, for example, among apes, there is inequality in the form of size, strength, potency and skill.”
   “But are humans not different?”
   “Even if humans inherited these inequalities the world might still have been more egalitarian and equitable simply because there were too few opportunities for enrichment.”
   “But why did that not happen?”
   “Because the potential was always there and the moment economic opportunities presented themselves – with the advent of first agriculture, then industry, then digital technology and finally the age of artificial intelligence – the natural tendency towards the equilibrium of a new and sharper inequality began until we have what we have today.”
   “But humans could have recognised the inequality, and unlike a pack of animals could have at least tried to mitigate it with social mechanisms.”
   “Many mechanisms were tried. From social security to social engineering like caste based reservations but everything failed. Numerous  rules and regulations were introduced to curb inequality but nature is such that people and organisations always found loopholes and ways to beat the system. Nothing really worked.”
   “So in the long run, the outcome was rarely what was desired – the rich remained rich or become richer while the common man stayed where he was, at the bottom of a hierarchy.”
   “Perhaps that is how it is meant to be. Perhaps equality is against nature? Perhaps that is  why we  will always tend towards the stability of an unequal world?”
   “So there is nothing that is fundamentally wrong in the fact that we are living at peace in comfort in a technopolis while millions of our brothers and sisters are languishing in the anarchy and barbarism that lies beyond our borders.”
   “Frankly my dear, it does not really matter what you and I think as right or wrong. The world has been around for many million years and will continue to be so for many, many more. Even otherwise, it is not for us to worry about such matters. The world can take care of itself.” 
   
   “I think it is getting late  ...”
   
   None of them had noticed that the sun had set long ago and the hillside had come alive with the twinkling lights of the homes that were scattered on its slopes. Niloofer headed for the kitchen to prepare dinner while Ruslan finally managed to unplug himself from his superlight Tiva.
   “So what do you kids plan to do tonight? After dinner?”
   “They are not going down to Anzali.”
   “I was wondering if I could take BB to a 3Dio arena tonight.”
   “Oh, that would be lovely. I didn’t know that you had a 3Dio here in Trans. We don’t have one yet in Chandilis.”
   “Then you will surely enjoy it.”
   “But wouldn’t a 3Dio be a little strenuous after your heavy dinner.”
   “Depends on what 3Dio they choose.”
   “Or to what extent we wish to run around.”
   “I have heard so much about the 3Dio.”
   “It’s really quite fascinating actually very immersive.”
   “Does it really blur the gap between the spectacle and the spectator?” 
   “You will see it for yourself, BB.”
   
   
   The maglev dropped the two of them off at the sprawling 3Dio arena at Bekandeh right on the Caspian coast. L?l? was jolly well aware of the technology behind 3Dio but nevertheless, the arena was quite a disappointment. It was more like a shopping complex, or perhaps a strip joint with loud lights that advertised not just food but many more sinful pleasures. The actual arena was enclosed behind high walls and of course they had to pay to get past them. Normally, people would have lunch, dinner or at least a few drinks but Niloofer had loaded them up with an enormous dinner. So, Xerxes and L?l? walked up to the door, placed their hands on the handle that sensed the hypodermic chip on their wrists, debited the necessary credits and allowed them to walk inside.
   
   The arena was just an empty space with spectators, or participants, as they were referred to, scattered inside. Some participants were sitting on sofa like seats while others were moving around – some slowly while others frantically and erratically. What was most amusing however were some participants who were gesticulating wildly and throwing their arms around! What was common to all participants was that they were wearing the special 3Dio Tivas that would transport them to their respective 3Dios!
   
   Xerxes and L?l? put on their 3Dio Tivas and they were instantly transported into a different world!
   
   The 3Dio was a hybrid of a classical video game and the MMORPG – massively multiuser online role playing game – that was delivered through an augmented reality platform. The creator, or director, would provide a basic storyline – adventure, violence, romance, comedy or whatever – and then it was up to the viewer, or participant, to view or experience it as they wished. 
   
   For some spectators, it was a very passive affair. They would sit on a sofa and see the actors in the 3Dio running around as per the script created by the director. But spectators could also participate in the script by interacting with the actors and that is where the AI would step in and modify the script to account for the action of the spectator. So the spectator could become a part of, or rather a participant in, the 3Dio and change the flow and storyline with their own actions.
   
   Xerxes and L?l? had purchased tickets for a who-dun-it 3Dio based on an ancient Agatha Christie story, And Then There Were None. Putting on their Tivas transported them to an isolated island on the coast of Devon, a province of erstwhile England. Since this particular 3Dio had a well known and well defined storyline, it was a passive show in which the spectators could only walk through and around the location where the events were happening to get a more personalized perspective. The active 3Dios would allow spectators to interact not just with the characters in the 3Dio but also other spectators as well and change the narrative. Thanks to the teletactile technology, spectators could experience contact with characters, artifacts and with spectators or participants, or in a sense had the option of becoming something like the participants in a reality show. But all this interactivity was only as long as the spectator was hooked to the Tiva. The illusion would of course crumble when the Tiva was taken off. The erstwhile spectator would then become just another person wandering around the arena and since they were no more controlled by the AI, they were likely to get physically bumped into by the active participants running around in the arena.
   
   “Agatha Christie is amazing, but I thought that there was one little gap in her story.” Xerxes and L?l? were sharing a large plate of chilled Beluga caviar in a little tavern on the edge of the Caspian.
   “What was that?”
   “All the characters got stranded on the island because a storm that blew up, right?”
   “I suppose so.”
   “But what if the storm did not blow up? Would the ‘unknown’ murderer’s plot still have succeeded? The potential victims could have escaped by taking the boat back to the mainland.”
   “I suppose it would need someone like my dearest BB to spot a plothole like that!”
   “That leads me to another question. What if this was an active 3Dio and we, and other participants were to act in concert to change the script.”
   “You mean to say that you could have shouted out the name of the murderer.”
   “That would ruin the story.”
   “Active 3Dio do not have predefined storyline as such. The AI engine keeps building a storyline as we go along.”
   “That would need a lot of computing power, especially if there were lots and lots of active participants.”
   “That’s where I understand that they are using quantum computers
   “Not unlikely. It’s the entertainment industry, and specifically porn that is the usually the first to monetise the latest in digital technology.”
   “It is almost like simulating the world itself and the world runs on quantum mechanics.”
   “In fact, the gap between real world and its simulation could or perhaps has become seriously blurred.”
   “Not really. In the simulation, you could take off your Tiva and return to the real world.”
   “True.”
   
   But to L?l?, it was not that simple. What would happen if you could not take off your Tiva? Would you be stuck forever in the simulation? Would the simulation become your world? And most importantly, what is my world? What is your world? Is there one objective reality or are there multiple ones?  What world are we simulating anyway?
   
   “Why? In the 3Dio that we just watched, we were simulating a world of twentieth century England.”
   “Who is this we?”
   “The producers of this particular 3Dio, the director, the technicians.”
   “And is the director working on his own? Or does she have computers?”
   “Of course, she has lots and lots of computing power that generates all this simulations.”
   “And these computers are intelligent, isn’t it?”
   “Yes of course, a lot of it is automated. It is not like the old days where we had teams and teams of animators who would draw frames of pictures.”
   “That is true as in any other fields of human activity. The crude, repetitive, boring tasks are being done my machines or rather intelligent programs.”
   “But if these programs are intelligent, why would they just stick to doing the boring stuff? What if they start playing pranks? Like creating three eyed dogs or for that matter anti-gravity.”
   “The director will of course fix these obvious errors and clean up the scripts. Or better still write another intelligent program to detect such errors and take action.”
   “So now it is two intelligent programs interacting with each other. That means we are back to GANs – Generative Adaptive Networks – again.”
   “It is not so much as technology as in the concept …”
   “What concept?”
   “The concept of reality. What is really real?”
   “What is physical is real. You and I are real. The characters we saw were not real.”
   “But what if they were being controlled by some real characters like you and me.”
   “Then they would be representations of the real characters.”
   “And if they were being controlled by intelligent computer programs? Like Bots”
   “That is a tough one. It may take some time and much effort but eventually we will be able to know what is real and what is fake.”
   “What if it takes too long and too much effort? Will we agree to accept the fake as the real?”
   “That is up to you  ...”
   “But the larger question is that even if we put in the effort, will we really be able to distinguish the real from the virtual? Or …”
   “Or what?”
   “Is there really any difference in the experience? Between the real and the illusory?”
   “It all depends, sweetheart, on what is the experience that you are talking about. Technology is great but there is a qualitative difference between the teletactile of a Tiva and the softness of pillows on a posturopedic bed!”
   
   Which of course was true. After a particularly torrid session of high drama and intense passion, Xerxes was sleeping soundly but his nasal sonorosity had kept L?l? awake and thinking. Now that she had experienced the physical aspect of what was essentially an emotional exercise, there was a new source of conflict, of discord in her mind or perhaps it was just a simple doubt. Back on Chandilis when she had actually longed for the physicality of the experience, she had always thought that the reality would be something far more intense. But now that she was here the intensity was somehow attenuated by external distractions and physical shortcomings! In fact, the physicality of the act seemed to be a hindrance to the emotional high that she had been expecting. As a mature adult with her obvious physical needs, she was no stranger to pornography in her Tiva but in retrospect, this personal, physical experience had been far too tame. The real experience was, as in most cases, way below what one would expect. Or, to put it otherwise, the virtual was far superior to the real. 
   
   Now if that be the case, could it be that the virtual was more preferable to the real, not just in sexuality but in all other sensory and psychosomatic experiences.
   
   But then again was there some deep rooted difference between the real and the virtual that was not readily apparent on the surface. While the digital world in general and AI in particular could mimic the biological world to the point where it was impossible to distinguish one from the other – as in an enlarged or more general version of the famous Turing Test – there was always this doubt about the quality of the mimicry. While a digital computer could obviously simulate the behaviour of a biological entity, did it have the understanding of what it was doing? For example, a car might stop if it sees a red light but does it know that a red light is an indication of a danger? Or for that matter, does it understand the meaning of danger as in the possibility of an accident and its consequences in terms of loss of life and the feeling despair that it might create? Or to take it to the next level of sex, a machine can create a sensation of sex but would it ever know what it means to have an orgasm? Or is it simply going through the motions of one? Was there a difference between exhibiting an intelligent behaviour and actually experiencing the emotions that result in the display of that intelligent behaviour? Shallow AI, the kind that exhibits intelligent behaviour was all around, but the real challenge was the Deep AI that could, or should, experience emotions. Did Deep AI exist? If so, how could one ever find it? Or if did not exist, was it possible at all? Or would it be that the biological would always trump the digital, the real will always trump the virtual on this final frontier?
   
   The real and the virtual were all colliding in her mind when L?l? finally dropped off to sleep.
   
   






3 MINDSCAPE


Xerxes and his business partner Kirill were sitting in a gondola suspended under a giant silvery balloon floating ten kilometres above the azure blue of the Caspian Sea. Far to the north were the snow capped peaks of the Alborz Mountain and below them between the blue of the sea and the white of the mountains was the wedge of green vegetation that was TransCaspia. K&X were in the business of creating art installations and this was the biggest project that they had ever worked upon. TransCaspia would be celebrating the seventy fifth year of its establishment and for that K&X had proposed a giant chandelier in the sky that would shoot coloured laser beams to each and every fence post on the techno border. The idea was very innovative, which was why it was accepted but the devil was in the detail. To get a line-of-sight into each border post, the chandelier had to be hoisted on a balloon far above the ground but the strong winds at that altitude would drag it away. So, powerful propulsion units were needed to keep the balloon in place and the inevitable drift and sway had to be factored into the overall design. The most complicated part was the control of the hundreds of microdrones that would fly through the beams and create additional points of reflection which along with reflections from mirrors placed at strategic points on the ground would create the immense moving lattice of light, a luminescent lace covering the land. Today, Kirill and Xerxes were scanning the ground with powerful bionoscopes to identify suitable reflector points and while doing so, they were occasionally peeping in through the windows of the houses below. One such house that they had peeped into was an apartment on the twenty seventh floor of a building on the Sefid River where L?l? was working from home!
   
   From that perspective on the gondola, L?l?’s work seemed mysterious. She was alone in a room, sitting at a desk and nodding her head. But in reality – or rather in virtuality – she was at the Machine Dynamics Facility at Arezia along with her doctoral guide, Dr Basava, and two others – Dr Jin Woo, the Korean leader of the terraforming project where NonaDexter would be used and Dr Hinata, one of the Japanese managers of the engineering consortium with extensive investments in Mars. Of course with the large latency in signal transmissions from Mars, Dr Hinata could not showcase her work live to the other three. Instead, Jin Woo was playing a 3Dio that Hinata had created and sent across a few minutes ago and he, L?l? and Basava were now watching Hinata maneuver a gigantic piece of machinery across the Martian landscape.
   
    The three spectators were in the cab with Hinata as she was trying to dig into the wall of a cavern in Hebrus Valles. 
   
   Given the thin and virtually non-existent atmosphere on Mars, one school of thought believed that the short term goal should be to create habitats inside caves. Not only could these sustain a regular atmosphere when sealed properly, but they would also protect the inhabitants from the killing cosmic rays that rain down mercilessly on the non-magnetic planet. The basic technology to excavate the caverns was not very new. It was a pretty standard underground mining practice where the excavator would crunch its way through the mine face. First explosives would be inserted in a specific pattern on the face. These would then be blasted and then the arm would move in to grab the debris and place it on the carts which would carry them out to the surface. But the process in Hebrus Valles was planned a little differently. In this case there already was an existing system of underground caverns and so the excavator never had a clean face to push its explosives in to. Moreover, it did not make sense to just remove the debris blasted from the face. Instead it had to be crushed fine, made into a mortar-paste and then packed tightly along the walls to make an airtight seal. What made the job particularly difficult was the sheer size of the excavation. Unlike the small, claustrophobic coal mines of long forgotten Dhanbad, about the remnants of which L?l? had heard of in Chandilis, these caverns were designed to be the size of ancient aircraft hangers. To cut through so much rock and plaster the edges required not just huge excavators but also very smart ones. Not only were the machines expected to be big and powerful but they also needed a very sophisticated control system through which the operator could manipulate the various parts.
   
   For L?l?, Basava and Jin Woo who had worked with realistic simulations and scale models, the sheer size of the equipment was overwhelming.
   “.. and remember, this is just a prototype that we have fabricated here.” Hinata was explaining to her spectators.
   “Ooree Baba, that is huge!” L?l? was amazed at the size, but of course, only Basava and Jin Woo heard her.
   “But with this we can test out how effective our control systems are,” Hinata continued, “and if you watch carefully, you will see how I am trying to scrape off that piece of rock from the ceiling.” She pointed towards the roof of the cavern where the excavator arm was brushing against the roof.
   “And once it is done, I will now push this finely ground debris into this crack and try to seal this hole.” A prod from the arm was now poking and prodding into roof.
   “But you see that this is where we are having problems since the hole is not being sealed properly.”
   Hinata went on speaking and describing the problem, but back on Earth or rather on the Tiva, Basava, L?l? and Jin Woo had already understood it.
   “Our control systems are simply not good enough, Dr Basava. What can we do about it?”
   “I know. I can see that. Dr Hinata is quite good with the excavator and even she could not get it right.”
   “So other operators would have even more difficulty in controlling these beasts.”
   “Is this a problem with how we have defined our partial differential equations? Are we missing any other factors that we should have factored into our model?”
   “Or is it that the solutions that we are generating are inaccurate.”
   “Well there is some inaccuracy in our solutions. There is a tradeoff between speed and accuracy. If we want higher accuracy, we would need more time.”
   “But that won’t work. This is a real time problem and if we spend more time solving equations, then the solutions would become irrelevant.”
   “What do you mean by that?”
   “Let me explain. Suppose you are trying to cross the road and you need to determine whether you will be hit by a car or not. If  you take too long to analyse all the possible cars that could come and hit you, you will realise that the cars that you have analysed have all gone past and a new set of cars have appeared and you start analyzing again.”
   “Net net, you can never cross the road.”
   “Exactly and that is what will happen here. As we push for higher and higher accuracy, our solution becomes slower and slower and more and more irrelevant!”
   “So how do we overcome this problem?”
   “We could use faster computers? Better algorithms?”
   “Unlikely. We are pretty much using the highest end machines that we have at the moment.”
   “And while algorithms can always be improved, it is not something that will happen on demand.”
   “Yes. We can only wait for some genius to come back with a better, faster algorithm.”
   “But we have no way of knowing when this genius will appear out of the blue.”
   “I still think, we should go for faster machines, my vote will be for quantum computers.”
   “I agree that quantum machines are faster but remember they are currently being used for a totally different class of problems.”
   “Using them to solve our problems is as complicated and as uncertain as building new algorithms.”
   “And then you have the additional complexity of operating them on Mars! Getting them to work here on Earth is difficult enough.”
   “We will drift away from solving our main excavation problem to a completely different problem.”
   “True. It seems we are stumped. I do not see how we can take this forward.” Jin Woo was rather despondent.
   “Panic not Dr Jin Woo, we will figure out something.” L?l? smiled at the Korean.
   “I am wondering … if, to use a very old cliché, we can think out of the box.” Basava seemed to be having an idea.
   “Please do. I will give you as many boxes as you want to think out of!”
   “No, no, that was just a turn of a phrase.”
   “But Basava-sir, you must be having something in your mind.”
   “I have a vague outline.”
   “What?”
   “The charm of quantum computers is that they can handle an element of ambiguity, the lack of a clear cut yes or no situation that is so necessary for traditional digital machines”
   “I know, but  ...”
   “The only other computational unit that can handle uncertainty is the human brain?”
   “Aha, you want to use artificial intelligence? Neural network technology”
   “Why artificial?”
   “What do you mean? We are already using humans as operators and you can see that it is not good enough.”
   “Hang on, hang on  ...”
   “Dr Hinata is one of the best …”
   “Relax, listen to me.”
   “We are all ears Dr Basava.” There was a hint of sarcasm in Jin Woo’s voice.
   “You have heard of bio-hackers.”
   “Yes. We also use them. We open doors with chips embedded in our palms”
   “You have also heard of thought controlled wheelchairs.”
   “Yes. For paraplegics who have lost control of all arms and legs …”
   “So can we try using the same technology and have thought controlled excavators.”
   “Why would that help?”
   “Well, the human mind works in ways that are very different from the way a normal digital computer works. That is why we can cross a busy road while a robot is still trying to calculate the probability of a collision”
   “Autonomous vehicles that drive themselves are also quite efficient in this regard.”
   “True, but nothing like the human mind in its speed and versatility and we could harness this in our excavators.”
   “Well why just excavators? In the whole range of devices that we need … to place explosives, to cement the cracks and what not.”
   “And all with just a single human being?”
   “Why not? In the past we had gods and goddesses with ten arms. Some people would of course see these ten arms as a metaphor for multitasking.”
   “But in this case you are proposing that all these huge equipment be somehow linked to the operator’s brain.”
   “Well our Tivas are connected to our brains and we can send and receive information and that is exactly what we need to do in this case.”
   “You really think that we could control our machines much more efficiently like this?”
   “I do not know. We need to try this out and see for ourselves whether it is worth the effort.”
   “L?l?. Do you think you could build a prototype?”
   “Frankly no.”
   “You have never said no so quickly.”
   “What I meant was this is nothing like what we have worked on so far.”
   “I know. We have always worked with electro-mechanical devices and so we need to go back to the drawing board again.”
   “Can we pull this expertise from someone, somewhere?”
   “We certainly should. There is no point in reinventing the wheel.”
   “So who has done something like this?”
   “Well no one has actually done this but I think I know of someone who has done something similar.”
....................................
   
   Dr Liu Fang was waiting for L?l? to appear in her Cerebral Dynamics Lab in the Hangzhou techno and when L?l? arrived, she received her with a big hug. Fang was just a few years older than L?l? but the two of them had shared a doctoral guide in Dr Basava who had made the connection between the two of them. Fang’s interest was in mind reading - not the ancient science associated with the occult, but the more contemporary approach based on electrical signals in the nervous system. This was not what she had started off with under Dr Basava who was more into the dynamics of mechanical systems but somewhere along the line, Fang had moved away from purely mechanical systems and into the intersection of the mechanical and the biological.
   
   Fang was with Zhejiang University. Her laboratory was located on the 39th floor of the NeoLiuhe Pagoda, built next to the old pagoda on the banks of the Qiantang River that flowed down to the East China Sea. From her desk, the view of the West Lake, located directly north of the Pagoda, was indeed spectacular. Hangzhou was perhaps one of the most picturesque places in the Mandarin speaking part of the world. That was why it was quickly locked down as a potential techno at the first signs of anarchy in the Middle Kingdom.
   
   “Hello, Dr Liu, so nice of you to meet me.”
   “Please call me Fang, L?l?. After all you are, what your folks would say, my GuruBehen! We share the same doctoral guide. How is Dr Basava?”
   “Sir is good, very good, though age is catching up with him.”
   “I know. You really cannot defy the Second Law.”
   “What a wonderful lab you have – this  spectacular view to begin with.”
   “Why don’t you come and spend some time with me here. There are many exciting things that we could do together.”
   “I will, I will, that is what Dr Basava was suggesting for the NonaDexter project.”
   “You are working on Mars, right?”
   “We are, but it is not really working out well.” L?l? told Fang about the discussion that she and Basava had had with Jin Woo and Hinata the day before.
   “So you want to control the excavator machines with your thoughts, like the way paraplegics, or paralyzed people, used to control their wheelchairs in the past.”
   “But these machines are far, far bigger and yet they need a finer, or rather more precise, controls.”
   “Actually, it is not very different from our Tivas that send and receive electrical signals from our brains, except that in this case, we have a human at one end and a machine at the other.”
   “So you could help us build one.”
   “Sure, but this would be a little different from the standard ones, but we can certainly help you with this.”
   “Who is this we?”
   “KinoBots. That is a company that I have founded along with some of the other faculty here. Incubated by the university of course and located, there.” and she pointed towards the body of water, the West Lake, glittering in the sunshine. “That is where most of the physical manufacture happens. I will take you there.”
   “Oh. That will be lovely. I like physical stuff. Stuff that you can touch and feel. The real stuff. Not this slightly slippery teletactile business.”
   “But the stuff that we are working on there is really high tech, if not uber tech and had it not been for Dr Basava, I doubt if you would even get to enter that place.”
   “Oh thank you so much Fang. But if it is a problem, I could have you deal with them on our behalf.”
   “Not at all, not at all. You would only have to agree to a non-disclosure and have it locked into the standard contracts blockchain. That would be enough.”
....................................
   
   The KinoBot factory was located, literally, inside the West Lake. Fang was waiting at the water’s edge for L?l?’s persona to materialize herself in her Tiva and once she did, she pointed to the islet of the Three Moons Mirroring the Moon.
   “You see that island? That was supposed to one of the most picturesque places in erstwhile China until it was overrun and trampled upon by a million tourists.”
   “Is it out of bounds now?”
   “Kind of, but that is where our lab is! In the ancient hollow pavilions built by the emperors of the Ming dynasty in the seventeenth century.”
   “You have converted a heritage structure into a lab?”
   “Well not quite, as you will see.”
   Fang boarded a sleek, semi-submersible – somewhat like a twin-seater, low in the water kayak – and L?l? joined her. It could have submerged but it did not. Instead it glided smoothly and silently up to the islet and docked at a jetty. The two women disembarked and Fang led L?l? to a small pillbox shaped building located near the shore, opened a door and stepped inside. A quick swish of an unseen elevator and suddenly there were in a dim, dark cavernous space illumined by the greenish light filtering in through the glass roof and the water above it.
   “Oh wow! We are under the waters of the lake.”
   “And we do not switch on the lights unless it is really necessary.”
   “Is this where you manufacture your thought controlled robots?”
   “Yes and let me show you around our facility.”
   
   The first part of the cavernous bay was the main robot assembly line. This is where robots were being built by other robots. Unlike most robots that were built for a single purpose like farming, KinoBot products were more general purpose devices that could provide a variety of services. In this sense they were more human-like, though not necessarily humanoid to look at. In fact, these devices were like more advanced versions of the early self-driving, or autonomous, cars that could navigate their way through complex routes. 
   
   “I see that a robot is manufacturing another robot. Does this mean that you have a self-replicating machine here?”
   “Oh! That is the holy grail of the robotic industry but we are not quite there as yet.”
   “I thought as much. For a robot to be able to build another robot, it would have to be an order of degree smarter than the robot that it is creating ... and hence by definition the robot that is being built would not be able to build another similar robot.”
   “Well that is not as simple as that. A human being can, and routinely does, create another human being that is as smart as or even smarter than the parent or the creator.”
   “Isn’t that the reason why robots are inferior to humans? After all they are programmed devices and the program that controls them is written by another human, not another robot.”
   “That hypothesis has been under challenge for quite some time. Computers can write programs or rather build software based computational models that are superior to the kind of models that they themselves have been programmed with.”
   “They? Themselves? You are assigning anthropomorphic characteristics to what are essentially electro-mechanical machines.”
   “The gap between man and machines is getting increasingly blurred.”
   “But still it exists, doesn’t it?”
   “Depends on what you mean to be a gap. There are machines that play better chess, compose better music, create better literature, pass better judgments in court, let alone find better routes in a map or simply take better decisions … and yes finally write better programs than humans.”
   “What do you mean write better programs? How would they know what programs to write? Do they understand what they are trying to do or are they simply manipulating symbols as per some rule.”
   “It’s all goal driven. It depends on what they are tasked to do? For example, robots or AI systems that were designed to bargain and negotiate prices eventually ended up by creating a unique language that is used for negotiations.”
   “Why would that be important?”
   “It is important because these machines are now creating their own representation of the world and using that representation to model their responses to an external stimulus.”
   “How does that matter?”
   “This is no different from the way that humans acquired language skills that gave them an evolutionary advantage compared to other bigger animals.”
   “So are we seeing the emergence of a new silicon based life form?”
   “We probably are but this life form, and if I may use that term in a loose manner, is evolving far, far faster than any comparable carbon based life form.”
   “You mean our robots will overtake us in evolutionary terms?”
   “It took us more than a hundred thousand years to get down from the trees and build towns and cities but the evolution of silicon based life forms is far, far faster. They are stronger in build, they do not get tired or bored and they can keep at whatever they wish to do without getting distracted.”
   “Does this mean that robots will come to dominate us just like we dominate other animals and plants on this planet?
   “It could, unless ….” and there was a hint of a smile on Fang’s lips.
   “What do you mean unless? And why are you smiling Fang-didi?” L?l? had unconsciously slipped into the honorific used in her part of the world to address a senior sister.
   “Well  ... trust humans to come out with something else.” Fang was smiling indulgently.
   “With what?”
   “Well, if you cannot compete, why not collaborate?”
   “What?” L?l? was taken aback. “Collaborate? Collaborate with whom? With other scientists across the world?”
   “That is of course there, for example, you are here and so is Dr Basava and others, but that is collaborating with other humans. We have been doing that for centuries. But we are talking of something else here.”
   “Are you  ...” L?l? was fumbling around with a loss of words. “Are you saying that … Are you collaborating with robots? Don’t tell me you have robot scientists here.”
   “Oh we are not that far ahead, though you never know we may be there someday.”
   “So what exactly do you have?”
   “Look at it this way. We consider Sapiens and Neanderthals as two different species and of course in the evolutionary process, the Neanderthals lost out to the Sapiens.”
   “Right, and this why we – you and me, the Sapiens – are still here and the Neanderthals are dead and gone.”
   “But what if Sapiens and Neanderthals could and did interbreed? And created a new species?”
   “Fang-didi, are you seriously suggesting that humans and computer breed?”
   “No my dear. This is not sexual or genetic breeding. All that we have in mind is some kind of a hybrid of man and machine.”
   “And how do you intend to create this hybrid?”
   “At the cerebral, the cognitive level, not the genetic sexual level. And that is why Dr Basava has sent you here.”
   “You mean that our neural circuits can get integrated?”
   “Of course, my dear. When you say thought control, what we have in mind is that our cognitive and cerebral abilities get integrated. The thought process, our biological brains and the AI in the robots get integrated at the information processing level.”
   “And I can control the machines – the intelligent machines – with my thoughts.”
   “Exactly my dear. That is exactly what we are trying to do.”
   “Are you trying to do this? Or have you already done this?”
   “OK. Let me show you where we are on this.”
   
   Fang led L?l? to an adjacent room where there were a couple of robots lying around in various states of assembly. 
   
   “In the past, we used to have electrodes that were directly implanted into our heads and used to  sense the electrical signals that the body was using to initiate thoughts or actual physical movement.”
   “But that is rather crude. Pushing electrodes into the brains is rather painful.”
   “That was the last century. Then we had light helmets that we could place on our heads or what was even better, wrist bands that could pick up signals from the rich network of nerves that run through our hands and help us do various things.”
   “Like what?”
   “Like picking up stuff from the floor or punching keys on a keyboard.”
   “So our nerves are carrying the information that we want to do something and your wristband is picking up that signal and transmitting it to a machine that does it instead of your hand doing it.”
   “But that is exactly what NonaDexter is expected to do!”
   “Sure. So if you want to do something with your hand – say pick up a box, or scrape something off the ceiling – we could have NonaDexter sensing your intent and then executing the same. But with far more precision and force.”
   “That is wonderful.”
   “It is but we could go even further.”
   “Oh God! How much further can you go?”
   “Let me take you to our most advanced lab.”
   
   The two of them walked into a dim, dark and cavernous room at the far end of KinoBot factory. In the middle of the room was a cage with a single seat and all around the cage were a set of terminals that were dark. There was nothing showing on them. Fang walked into the cage, sat down on the seat and pressed a few switches. Instantly, the terminals around the cage came alive – some with coloured lights, some with strange patterns and some with text.
   
   L?l? walked around the terminals and saw that it not just patterns and colours that were showing. There were words there as well. One terminal showed the words surprise, another showed technology a third showed man-machine while a fourth showed reading thoughts.
   
   “Fang-didi …” L?l?, the smart girl that she was, was already getting a hang of what was going on. “Are your thoughts being read by the computer?”
   
   “Yes my dear! It is still a little primitive but the system is reading my thoughts”
   “But how? There is no wire that is tapping into your brain or your nervous system.”
   “Ever since the days of Maxwell we have known that you do not need wires to capture electromagnetic signals.”
   “You mean that the system is smart enough to pick up your thoughts?”
   “Smartness comes much later. First we need sensitivity.”
   “Meaning?”
   “Why do you think that we have managed to get a lab at the bottom of the lake?”
   “To block out all other electromagnetic signals!” L?l? was smart enough to figure out that the normal, physical environment had enough electromagnetic noise, not just from local equipment but also from the sun and from cosmic rays. These would mask any faint or weak signals with a biological origin.
   “Yes. That is right. The electrical signals in our nervous system leak out – in a sense – from the axons and dendrons and spread through the environment.”
   “Isn’t this something that was captured through Kirlian photography?”
   “That was something rather dodgy and was never substantiated. But in this case, we really can trap the signals that emanate and then it is matter of data science, deep learning and AI that helps us decode what the signals mean.”
   “So you can read someone’s thoughts?”
   “Not yet. We are yet to crack this completely. We have a vague idea of what you are thinking of, some idea of your emotions.”
   “But not a full transcript of what I have in mind.”
   “Not yet. But we are improving, our models are becoming better and faster”
   “Can you have them read my thoughts?”
   “You have to be here in person. The signals emanate from your body, your nerves, not from your virtual image that I can see in my Tiva!”
   “So my thoughts are still safe and private.”
   “Perhaps.”
   “What do you mean perhaps? Who can read my thoughts?”
   “You are in TransCaspia, so only someone there can read your thoughts.”
   “Is this technology already in use?” L?l? was suddenly thinking about her experience in Chandilis.
   “Not yet deployed on a large scale … but quite a few technos are experimenting with this. But it is not something that is discussed widely. Remember, you too are under a non-disclosure commitment.”
   “Fair enough. But tell me Fang-di, does this mean that even our thoughts are no more private.”
   “It’s a matter of time L?l?. We are getting to a point where we will be able to read, or rather interpret, what you are thinking about.”
   “And that too without my consent! That is the frightening part.”
....................................
   
   L?l? was distraught! She was upset, she did not whom she could talk to and she did not know what to do next. The mere thought that all her thoughts were public, or at least accessible to unknown people, was terribly depressing and in her mind she was back in Chandilis at the WALK event in Teledihi where the issue of privacy had been first discussed. While she had never been a technophobe, this complete loss of privacy was so deeply intrusive that it left her feeling totally vulnerable if not actually violated. 
   
   The non-disclosure that she had signed before entering the KinoBot facility was another headache. Since this had been a smart-contract on a blockchain, a violation would automatically and immediately trigger the penalty of severing her from the digital network for a period of time. This was like being in a jail or at least in solitary confinement because without access to the network there was very little that one could do – other than eat and sleep in one’s own apartment. No Tiva, no Dija, no mobility, no access to anyone and not even the ability to open most digitally controlled doors. One would have to depend on someone to even bring in the daily food! L?l? had casually described the KinoBot factory, particularly the underwater facility, to Xerxes on her Dija and had immediately received a self-destructing message reminding her of the non-disclosure.
   
   Suddenly, TransCaspia seemed so very claustrophobic! Mentally claustrophobic. It was not that   Xerxes’ apartment was bugged to pick up her thoughts but now that she was aware of it, she could sense where all this technology may be used. Obviously, when she had arrived from Chandilis, her thoughts were scanned in the immigration capsule. That is why the music was being changed to reflect or modify her mood. That was the minimum that she had been able to detect or realise – who knows what else was being read off the signals that she was emitting? What was worse was that other than Fang there was no one with which she could even talk about this. Now she realised why Nirmal had tried to meet in remote and abandoned places in Chandilis but obviously he had failed. Someone had figured out her intentions and had deemed her important enough to be blocked from such activities.
   
   Why would anyone try to keep her from getting upset about privacy? Why would her activities to discuss, let alone protect, privacy be deemed to be so important? Why was she important in someone’s scheme of things? Who was this someone? Was it a group of individuals? Whoever they were, they must be extremely powerful technologically as well as socially and politically.
   
   In fact there were two strands of discomfort that were gnawing at L?l?’s innards. One was the rise of the robots, of the AI systems, that were taking on a more and more important role in the governance of societies. Was this good? Or was this bad? On the face of it things were going good but in the long run would this continue to be good or would it build in some kind of unpleasant bias into the governance of the world? 
   
   The other key discomfort was the loss of privacy in the sense that the robots were peeping into her life. Not that she had anything to hide but what disturbed her was that the robots had peeped into her life and had discovered her discomfort with them and were actively working to shield her from these discomforting thoughts. Obviously not for her comfort or benefit but to ensure that her discomfort did not translate into her behaving in a manner that could hamper the way the robots were ruling, or could rule, the world. 
   
   Net-net, were the robots, the AI system, with her or were they against her? One is fine with loss of privacy within a family. Even though she had never had a family until very recently, she could understand that privacy was far more relaxed between say partners, or parents and children. People were comfortable sharing information with people whose intentions were aligned with theirs but not so with strangers or hostile people. So the bottom line was – should  she view robots as, for the lack of a better word, family and allow them to know about her? Or should she view them as others who had no business to know about her. Perhaps she could have still sorted this out but for the fact that the robots had barged their way into her life and were working overtime to make sure that she did not view them as suspicious others. Forget privacy, was someone taking decisions about how she should behave towards those who were taking the decisions? This recursive loop was what was really, really bugging her.  
   
   Chandilis, TransCaspia and Hangzhou were all identical in terms of the dense and claustrophobic fog that was closing in on L?l? and it seemed that there was no way out! The world was not enough! But wait! If the world was not enough, was there a way for her to get out of this world? Was there another world where she could escape to? Of course there was. Mars.

   






4 AREZIA


L?l? was thrilled. 
   
   She had just received a message on her Dija that she had been selected for the journey to explore the possibility of mining thorium in the lower reaches of the Elysium Mountain. Thrilled, because it would give her a chance to be on the surface of the Red Planet where she had arrived about 300 solar-days or sols ago. 
   
   Days on Mars were almost as long as days on Earth and the 668 sols in a Martian year had been divided into the standard twelve Earth months. However the wide variance in the length of the seasons and the need to align them to the tropical year meant that months differed in length – months in the northern spring were more than 60 sols long while those in autumn were less than 50 sols. Actually, the months were more for nostalgia and most dates were based on sols and the year. The current Mars year was 105, counted from the date of the Great Storm that was observed on Mars in 1956 CE.
   
   Being on the surface of Mars was both a pleasure and a privilege for Martians. Contrary to the popular imagery of people living in dome cities and zipping around in dune buggy style rovers, life on Mars was predominantly underground. The lack of a strong magnetosphere meant that there was no protection from the hazardous cosmic radiation and the presence of toxic perchlorates on the surface meant that most of the population lived underground and more importantly indoors. In fact, the Hebrus Valles area had been selected as the location of Arezia precisely because there was a system of underground caverns carved out by huge rivers that had once flowed through the area. Initial robotic explorers had not only mapped out the terrain but had also created the initial living spaces that had sheltered the first settlers. These pioneers in turn had explored, excavated and sealed off huge sections of caverns to create an underground ecosystem that was at the heart of mankind’s current dream of colonizing Mars.
   
   L?l? had been lounging on a bed mounted on the wall of her personal living module located in Level 3 of the Tinjar sector – the sectors were named after prominent mountain ridges on Mars. This module was like a reasonably comfortable hotel room. Two of the walls had large “windows”, actually giant zLED screens that showed what she would have seen if this room was on the tenth floor of a building on the surface, instead of being buried a hundred metres underground. What was even nicer was that the image changed with the time of the day and the actual, or preferred, weather outside so it was really as if she was living on the surface except that she could not open the window and feel the wispy thin breeze.
   
   Had she been on Earth, L?l? would have immediately Tiva’d Xerxes with this good news but with a radio signals taking more than ten minutes to travel from Mars to Earth, no conversation, let alone video or telepresence was possible. Instead, she called up Knut, the Finnish microbiologist with whom she had developed a close friendship ever since she had arrived on Mars.
   
   Knut was also a part of the terraforming project and his job was to make sure that the giant farms had the right amount of microbes and other organics to keep the plants healthy and flowering. Thanks to the icy permafrost that lay beneath the caverns of Arezia, water was not a problem but the Martian soil was far too sterile to support any kind of agriculture. Knut’s team had the responsibility of increasing the quality and quantity of organics in the soil so that they could grow kale, cabbage, potatoes, and other fresh food. In fact, growing food was one of the most pervasive obsessions of the pioneer settlers that along with the quest for energy was one of the critical components of the Martian economy.
   
   “Hi Knut, you know what?”
   “You going on the Elysium expedition?” He was aware that she was very keen to be on the expedition and had helped her file her application. So he guessed as much from the excitement in her voice. Even though L?l? was not a geologist, they had wanted someone who could help figure out the mechanics of mining and L?l?’s experience with the NonaDexter would certainly be very useful.
   “Yes, and it will give me a chance to be on the surface.”
   “I know. It can become claustrophobic down here.”
   “Not that I mind being underground, but to be able to be out there, under the stars is certainly very welcome.”
   “When do you depart?”
   “I will have to check with Ramses.” Ramses was the senior most geologist on Arezia and the fact that he would be going to Elysium personally to explore the thorium deposits was an indication of the importance of the project. “But first, I need to talk to you, I need to know more about life on the surface.”
....................................

   Knut, with his farms and plants that needed every little bit of the weak sunlight, was far more of a surfacer than L?l? who seldom had a chance to be there. In fact, after her arrival at Arezia, she was yet to leave the pressurized confines of the cavernous habitat and had only been to the Skyview Lounge just once. The Lounge was located at the base of one the famous skylights in the cavern system that looked up into the sky. Even though it was covered with a glass, one could still see the sky, stars and – if really lucky – even the moons, Deimos and Phobos. It was very expensive and seats had to be booked weeks in advance but even then the view was not as beautiful as it was from their zLED ‘windows’. L?l? spent most of her time at work, either at the rock-face where NonaDexter was in use or in her ‘plum’ – personal living module, PLM – either working on her differential equations, or as more often the case, wracking her brains on the issue of intrusive surveillance and the loss of personal privacy.
   
   Arezia, and Mars in general, was better off in the privacy perspective when compared to Chandilis, TransCaspia or Hangzhou. Society on Mars was still loosely coupled with that on Earth because of the uncertainty in the latency of data communication. On Earth, all systems – and that included all AI based command and control mechanisms – were based on the assumption that there was universal, ubiquitous and unbroken connectivity between any two devices but this was no more true when the devices were on Mars. Secondly, on Mars, energy was very expensive. Mars was bitterly cold and energy was required not just for room heating, but to melt ice for water and for the electrolysis of water to produce breathable oxygen.  This energy was provided through a combination of solar cells that dotted the surface and the kilopower nuclear reactors taken from Earth and there was never enough of a surplus to keep the AI engines running – learning, monitoring and controlling – all the time. Society on Mars was, in a sense, rustic and rather primitive. People were still focused on the primary goals of food, habitat and safety – a contemporary version of roti, kapada aur makaan that Stone Age cavemen on Earth might have been able to relate to! After all, Arezia was one giant system of caverns. This preoccupation with the basics of survival left them with little energy – literally and figuratively – to deal with complex surveillance issues that were so common on Earth and from which L?l? had secured a temporary reprieve by coming to work on the NonaDexter robot at Arezia.
   
   NonaDexter was a modern engineering marvel. Intelligent and almost autonomous, this remarkable robot had literally carved its way through the ancient underground caverns of Hebrus Valles at the majestic pace of about three metres per day. Not only would it break through the rock face but would also scrape the walls clean and then plaster them over with the finely crushed debris so as to leave a smooth, rectangular tunnel. This tunnel was almost airtight. All that was required after that was to seal off the newly carved tunnel with a vertical wall and plug any leaks that could vent off the newly admitted atmosphere. L?l? was a part of the team that managed NonaDexter and their current goal was to build it’s bigger, faster and smarter cousin that could crunch through the bedrock at least ten metres per day.
   
   While L?l? and her NonaDexter burrowed underground, Knut and his team worked on the surface, tending the giant farms. Unlike the cozy comforts of the subterranean caverns, the surface of Mars was a hostile place. The air was way too thin for humans to breathe or to sustain animal life. However even the space-suits and the domed, hemispherical bubbles – so beloved of early science fiction novels – that people could seemingly live in were not safe. First there was no magnetosphere to shield living cells from the incessant rain of the murderous cosmic rays. Even a few months of exposure to these rays was enough to kill a man as quite a few of the early pioneers had learnt at great cost. Better shields against cosmic rays had now been developed – and installed both on space suits and on surface habitats but even now, exposure to the surface was generally considered hazardous and was avoided as much as possible. 
   
   But more than cosmic rays, it was the toxic perchlorates in the Martian dust that were even more harmful. Not only were they harmful for humans but the dust was so fine that it was almost impossible to contain and control. If one were to step outside a habitat and walk around the surface, then the dust that would cling to the spacesuit would come back into the habitat along with the suit and then it would be almost impossible to remove! Even multiple airlocks and decontamination chambers were not adequate to keep the toxic dust out. So the concept of walking around in pressurized suits had in general been abandoned except in special cases where it was really necessary. Nowadays, vehicles – both large transporters as well as personal mobility devices – would lock themselves against door hatches of habitats or other vehicles and personnel would move directly from one pressurized, sanitized environment to the other without any exposure to the deadly dust. 
   
   For Knut and his farms this was a special challenge because the crops had to be in, and in contact with, the toxic soil, but the farmers had come out with some unique solutions. First, all farming as such was fully automated and humans were required only to repair and maintain the so called farm-bots. These devices were programmed to be smart enough to carry out all the routine activities like planting, fertilizing, de-weeding and harvesting as per the requirements of the particular plant. What was more interesting – and this was what Knut was personally working on – were the microbes that were introduced to increase the fertility of the soil. But the biggest and most exciting work was on the microbes that could eat the perchlorates and break them down to produce oxygen. In fact, this path breaking technology – that on one hand detoxes the soil and as a byproduct, produces what humans on Mars needs most – meant that Zula Senai, the pioneer in this area, was in line for the recently instituted Mars Builder award.
   
   In fact, some of the greenhouses where these microbes had been deployed in bulk were such that humans in shirt sleeves could work without any problem, especially during the warm summer months.
....................................
   
    “But first, I need to talk to you …. I need to know more about life on the surface.”
   
   “Sure, let us meet at the Kakori tonight. Shall update you.” The Kakori restaurant named after the Kakori crater in the Valles Marineris area, that in turn was named after the famous Kakori Kebabs – so soft that even a toothless person could enjoy them – was an inexpensive hangout frequented by young Martians.
   
   Running away from TransCaspia had meant that L?l? was more or less cut-off from Xerxes and this had been tough. In fact, she had moved from Chandilis to TransCaspia because there had been a void in her life caused by the lack of a family that she had never had. In TransCaspia she had found that missing piece in Xerxes and Niloofer but had had to leave them behind when the privacy demon chased her away to Mars. She had thought that she would somehow continue with her long distance relationship, as she had when she was in Chandilis, but she had not factored in the intolerable transmission delay that made even simple conversation impossible. She was of course aware that in the dim, distant past, lovers and partners would send letters - snail mail - and then wait months for an answer but that was then,  this was now. The world had changed and so had expectations. Slowly and inevitably, their bonds had loosened and Knut, that dashing Nordic farmer with his Viking blood was someone to whom L?l? would now turn, more often than not, for friendship and more.
   
   Three days later, L?l?, Ramses and Yonas, their recce-truck driver, set out from Arezia for the Elysium Mountains located at the eastern edge of the vast plain that stretched all around the caverns of Hebrus Valles. The absence of magnetic fields and the lack of abundant energy meant that maglevs were not feasible on Mars and travelers had to use SUV style off-road vehicles, albeit with many Mars specific features. 
   
   They had started off on the well defined, hard-top Mars Highway 1 that went south towards Galeville, the older but smaller settlement in the Gale Crater where humans had first pitched their tents on the planet. On both sides of the road, as far as the eye could see, the reddish brown surface was covered with vast greenhouses that supplied vital farm products to both Arezia and Galeville. Most of greenhouses were managed by automated farmbots but occasionally they would spot a solitary farmer tending, not the crops but, the machinery that was tending crops. In each case, Yonas would let loose a blast from their hooter but in the thin Mars atmosphere, sound does not travel far. Nevertheless, quite a few of the farmers would see the approach of their recce-truck and raise an arm in acknowledgement of their passing by.
   
   The first hundred kilometres were not too difficult and they covered it well before noon. This is where they would leave the Highway and turn eastwards towards the Elysium Mountains. There was no road anymore and it would be up to Yonas now to pick their way through the rugged terrain. In fact, it was not just Yonas but the autonomous navigation that would take them across. Taking a three-tonne vehicle across a broken terrain was not easy. An awkward fall into a shallow ditch could shear an axle leaving the truck crippled and the travelers stranded thousands of kilometres from a safe sanctuary. Hence there were radars that continually looked both ahead and sideways and the AI in the semi-autonomous vehicle would pick the best or safest route towards the next waypoint. Yonas’ task was more like keeping an eye on the general movement and in some cases choose one of the multiple routes suggested by the computer. 
   
   But there were many other displays on the dashboard. In addition to the current power output of the micro nuclear-piles that supplied both heat to the cabin and electricity to the motors on the wheels, there were other displays that showed the cabin temperature, cabin pressure, the percentage of oxygen and carbon dioxide and the level of cosmic ray radiation. Then there was the Satnav that located them on the surface and the estimated time to the next waypoint. Next was the fill-status of the lavatory sludge to ensure that the inbuilt toilet would not overflow and the status of the recycling process that made sure that no useful organic material or water was ever wasted. Finally there was the weather map of the surrounding area that included sunrise, sunset, the transit of the communication satellites and the probability of dust storms that could render them blind, immobile and without solar power. All this information was of course transmitted every ten minutes – when satellite communication was possible – to their controller at Arezia and through the controller to the technical backup teams who would be available for any emergency. All told, a drive through a hostile Marscape was a little bit more challenging than an off-road jaunt on friendly Earth!
   
   “AG03 dot 39 leaving Galeville highway. Switching on recorder.” This was the 39th trip of vehicle number 3 from Arezia and as it left the well travelled highway, it was switching on its StreetCam recorder. This would make sure that its route and everything along it would be recorded and incorporated into the ever evolving map of Mars that future travelers in autonomous vehicles could use and benefit from.
   
   ‘Aggie3’, as the recce-truck was affectionately referred to by its crew, left the security and safety of the well travelled highway and headed approximately East-by-Northeast towards the Elysium Mountains. The surface was generally flat but strewn with boulders that AG03 had no difficulty in detecting, dodging or negotiating.
   
   “Has anyone else travelled through this path before?” L?l? was curious.
   “No, certainly not up to the Elysium. But there have been some traversals on either side of the highway.”
   “The Hermit might have, though we do not know for sure”
   “Who is the Hermit?”
   “You will know about him if you are really interested in exploring the vastness …” Yonas chipped in. “But we are the first to be in this particular area sir.” Yonas continued. “We do not have a StreetCam ground map of this area, only three year old, HiRISE v3 maps that we are following.”
   “If Elysium is as promising as it seems from the sky, then we would surely have another highway on this route.”
   “It’s so exciting to literally blaze a new trail through this surface.”
   “Everything on Mars is so exciting. Today, when I set out for Elysium, I had the same thrill that I had when I had set out from Gale to Arezia.” Ramses was a veteran Martian
   “That would be when?”
   “In the early 80s. About 25 years ago.”
   “Mars years?”
   “Of course, I do not think in Earth years anymore.”
   
   L?l? calculated, that that would mean that Ramses was about 70 Earth-years old. He was still remarkably fit for his age, given that quite a few of the early pioneers were badly affected by the radiation that they had inadvertently exposed themselves to.
   
   “How often do you go back to Earth, Commander?”
   “Not too often. But my wife is back there so I have been there a couple of times.”
   “Doesn’t she want to join you here?”
   “She is still not convinced about the suitability of Mars as a place to spend a lifetime on. She has been here twice, but more like being on an extended vacation. My son has no intention of coming here.”
   “But you are committed to Mars?”
   “I came here on a whim. Because there is hardly any geological work left on Earth. Everything has been explored and measured. Here was the challenge of a whole new geology or rather areology. But once I was here, I was hooked.”
   “There was so much to do. So much to discover.”
   “True. But the other factor was that there were so few people around. Mars is empty and that’s what I love. The vast emptiness.”
   “You do not like people?”
   “I hate it when you have too many people. Planet Earth is sick and the disease is man. That is why I am never really comfortable on Earth.”
   “Don’t you feel lonely out here?”
   “You can be lonely even in a crowd if you cannot connect with people around you. What matters is your ability to connect.”
   “With what?”
   “With the cosmos and ultimately yourself.”
   “That is a strange way to overcome your loneliness.”
   “It is a different way to look at yourself and the world around you. If you meet the Hermit you would know what I mean”
   “Who is this Hermit that you refer to?”
   “He is from your part of Earth but he is so different.”
   “Where can I meet him? Or find him?”
   “That is difficult. I met him just once. In a bar, late at night and next morning when I recovered from the hangover, he was gone.”
   “Hangover? Where did you get liquor here on Mars?”
   “Well it happens, once in a while.” Ramses smiled, “If you have been here long enough you know of stuff that others dont!”
   “Is he on Dija?”
   “If he chooses to be so.”
   “Is he a loner?”
   “He is. Which is why I like him.”
   “Were you like this on Earth? Or did you become like this on Mars.”
   “Mars gives you time – and space – to think. To think through many of the mysteries that surrounds us.”
   “There are so many things buzzing in my head commander that I think that one day they will burst out.”
   “Not to worry my dear. I am sure that it is on Mars that you will be able to resolve all these contradictions and find your way forward.”
   “Why do you say so?”
   “I believe that there is something magical on the Red Planet, but I do not know what exactly is that.”
....................................
   
   “Just passed our first waypoint Commander. Now altering course a little eastward.”
   “Do we pass to the South of the Hyblaeus Fossae, Yonas?”
   “We do Sir. We need to go round the Elysium Chasma. Aggie3 cannot negotiate the slopes of the chasm.”
   “But the Fossae is OK right? We would like to see the place a little closely.”
   “Sure, sir. We could veer left and pass along the southern bank.”
   “Let me look at the map.”
   “Actually we could follow it from this fork.” Yonas jabbed a point on the zLED screen that was showing a map of the fossa – a depression in the ground.
   “When water flowed along it, it would have carried more with it than just dead rocks.”
   “I know, I know,” L?l? was suddenly very excited. “I have heard in Chandilis that the Subarnarekha – the golden stream – used to carry gold dust in its flow.”
   “That’s right. Gold can be panned from streams and river beds.”
   “But I guess that all the surface gold has been taken out by now. It will only be found deep in the ground.”
   “That is certainly true on Earth, but hey, here on Mars we would be the first.”
   “So we could find something on the surface.”
   “Yes, something deep from the bowels of the planet that has been washed out when the rivers roared through these chasms.”
....................................
   
   “Beginner’s luck!” 
   
   Ramses was peering at the zLED screen on the Gamma Spectrometer located in the rear of their recce-truck. He was peeping over L?l?’s shoulder and even the wizened Mars veteran Yonas could feel that there was something in the air!
   
   Aggie3 was parked on the edge of a shallow depression, a fossa, that they had been following since the Hyblaeus fork. They were nearly a week out of Arezia and should have been at the foothills of the Elysium by tomorrow. But Ramses had decided to take a little detour and so the mountains where still 300 kilometres away, looming silently over the vast plain. The team did have one extra-vehicular suit that would have allowed one of them to walk around the car but the hassles of getting in and out of it – and the subsequent detox procedure –  was so great that Ramses had decided that they would use the grabber – the articulated arm attached to the rear of the truck – for all excavations. So they had moved along the edge of the depression relatively quickly.
   
   Every half a kilometre, Aggie3 would stop, the grabber would stretch out, pull in a fistful of the dark sandy material and deposit it in the receiving chute of the Gamma Spectrometer. This would then be evaluated. Yonas was moving the truck, L?l? was maneuvering the grabber and Ramses was watching the display – and each time there would be nothing but the usual. After the initial excitement, it had really become a chore and L?l? – who was new to this – was getting tired. 
   
   Then of course, Aggie3 was nowhere as comfortable as her personal living module in Tinjar sector. There were two bunks at the back of the recce-truck that was shared, in rotation, by the current three member crew and while Ramses and Yonas were quite accustomed to this cramped living space, for a newbie like L?l? it was rather claustrophobic. In fact, after the initial euphoria of being on the surface, she had realised how comfortable Arezia was – but then of course she was not the type who would ever complain about such matters! Instead, she had read up the Gamma Spectrometer manual and had taught herself how to operate it and interpret the signals.
   
   The blue dawn of a new Mars day was just about breaking out of the eastern sky and L?l? was up and about. Surely up and but not really about as there was hardly any space to move around in Aggie3. Ramses was still snoring – rather softly though, and Yonas was slumped on the driver’s seat.
   
   “This blue dawn looks so cool. I wish I could go for an EVA2.”
   “I know it has been rather boring for the past two days ever since the Commander started this grab and look routine.”
   “Have you been on many such journeys Yonas?”
   “Oh well. This is my job and I kind of like it. But this scoop and scoot is getting on my nerves as well.”
   
   L?l? looked across the fossa and suddenly from the dim, dark recess of her mind, she could see the Subarnarekha – from her days in Chandilis – floating before her eyes. But more than the scenery, it was the flow of the water as it curled past the opposite bank that caught her mind’s eye. Who was it who was telling her that it was on the curves that the gold dust would get deposited? A flash of a distant memory? Or was it something more? For a moment, her mind reeled before she steadied herself.
   
   “Tell you what, let us do a little scoot and scoop on our own, when the Commander is still snoring.”
   “That would be violation of protocol. To move a vehicle on Mars without an order from the Commander.”
   “The Commander orders you to follow the Engineer’s order.” Ramses’ voice rumbled through the truck! He was awake but was possibly lying in …
   “Sir, you are awake?”
   “You thought I was still sleeping eh! … but go ahead. Let me catch up with the mail.” The mail would have come in through the night, when bandwidth was more readily available.
   
   Yonas fired up the truck and moved it along the edge of the fossa. 
   “Can we move a little bit into the depression? And go across it. Or would that be too risky?”
   “We can. But let me first throw in an anchor here, so that we could winch ourselves back to safety in case the floor of the fossa is too soft for the wheels to bite.” The many years of driving around on Mars was reflected in Yonas’ ideas.
   “Great. Then let us go right across to the other bank where it is curving in. If this was indeed a flow of water then that would be where the sediments might drop.”
   
   Aggie3 crawled into the fossa but there was really not much to worry about. The bed was firm and after a few tentative lurches, Yonas confidently drove it across to the other bank, while trailing a chain to the anchor that they had left behind. Then L?l? gingerly scooped up a cupful of sand and ran it into the receptacle of the spectrometer. After a few minutes, the display of the spectrometer came alive.
   
   “Sir! Commander Ramses … can you please come in for a minute.”
   “Did you get something, kiddo?” Yonas was the first to sense something urgent in her voice.
   “This is different from what we have been seeing so far.”
   “Let me see.” Ramses had scrambled out of his bunk and was now standing behind L?l?.
   “Please take your seat Commander.”
   “No need. I can see from here. Can you scroll left please and now right.”
   “Sir  ... this looks like the spectrum for  ...”
   “BINGO  ...” Ramses gave a yell that might have been heard not just on Arezia but also on Earth as well, “It’s Thorium.” 
   
   “Beginner’s luck!” 
....................................
   
   The Kakori Restaurant was buzzing with people when Knut walked in arm-in-arm with L?l? – now being referred to as the Thorium Girl in Mars media – and introduced her to the group of fellow Martian’s who were waiting to meet her. After the round of introductions were over and plates of food and pitchers of synthetic juice had been ordered, L?l? regaled everyone with the details of how they had located the thorium deposits along the ancient river bed while Knut had to go out of the way to tell everyone how it as she, his significant other, who had made the critical breakthrough by figuring out how the flow of water would have deposited the minerals. Fortunately, large parts of the thorium deposits that L?l? and her team had discovered were on or around the central mound in the middle of a small and not-too-old crater and hence could be exploited without too much effort or expenditure. 
   
   “Thorium deposits here means that energy will never be scarce on Mars anymore.”
   “This is more energy than what we could ever have dreamt of.”
   “So no more chilly nights.”
   “Now I know what ancient men would have felt after discovering fire!”
   “And no more waiting for shared transport.”
   “All thanks to our Thorium Girl.”
   “It’s much easier to discover new things in this virgin landscape. On Earth anything new that can be found easily has already been found by someone else!”
   “Still, some one had to do it and you did it.”
   “Only a matter of chance. I just happened to be at the right place at the right time.”
   “Actually a little more than that.” A tall, well-built man with a bald, clean shaven head, who was sitting quietly at the next table and listening to the conversation broke in. “If you had not decided to cross the fossa and explore the curve of the wall where the flow would have been turned around, I doubt if you would have spotted the tell tale deposits.”
   “You are very correct Sir.” L?l? replied. “Back home in Chandilis, we have heard so many tales of gold dust that were once found along the curved banks of the Subarnarekha that the moment I saw the fossa, I thought that that is where we must look.”

   “It was obvious to you as a novice but not to the veterans. That is very strange.”
   “I suppose it was luck and chance Sir, beginner’s luck as some would say.”
   “Perhaps it is but then again, perhaps it is not, but in either case, you have discovered it.”
   “And I am grateful that the Arezia administration has accepted the name that I have proposed – Jadugoda – for the thorium mines.”
   “The energy potential of Jadugoda could transform the economy of Arezia.”
   “True. There is so much energy out there that we could forget about scarcities.”
   “And all this energy can be put to many other uses as well … not just food and shelter.”
   “Of course, better computational and communication facilities that we are still lacking on Mars.”
   
   






5 ORCUS PATERA


Orcus Patera is a strange oval shaped crater located in the middle of Elysium Planitia – the vast plain that lies between the two towering volcanoes –  Elysium Mons in the East and the truly gigantic Olympus Mons in the West. Human settlement had commenced at Galeville at the south-eastern corner of the Elysium Planitia and had then spread north to the underground caverns of Arezia in the Hebrus Valles. There had been some plans about creating another underground habitat in the spectacular canyons of Valles Marineris in the western hemisphere but the discovery of thorium near the Hyblaeus Fossae had forced a rethink. A new mining township, Jadugoda, had come up on the southern slopes of the Elysium Mountains and the original NonaDexter at Arezia had been quickly pressed into service at Jadugoda to burrow deep into the mountain for the precious thorium and in the process create a catacomb of tunnels. In parallel, Aria Radioactiva, a subsidiary of Geo Radioactiva, the smallest of the three companies that built nuclear reactors on Earth had pulled off a major coup by bagging the construction rights for a mega thorium cycle reactor on Mars. The frontier spirit of the settlers meant that many of the checks and balances imposed on Earth for the safety of the reactors had been ignored or played down and both the mines and reactor were up and running in what would have been an impossible and unbelievable timeframe back home.  Energy scarcity was now a thing of the past.
   
   The road from Arezia to Jadugoda was no more the unknown and unexplored terrain that L?l? had traversed with Ramses and Yonas when she had discovered the first traces of thorium in the region. Now it was a firm blacktop that swooped around the base of the Elysium Mountain and after passing close to the thorium mines of Jadugoda, headed out towards the Wild West. Traffic was brisk – by Martian standards – with a steady stream of battery powered Alsets and many other types of vehicles travelling up and down between Arezia and Jadugoda. Some of these were the huge, lumbering 36-wheeler types that despite their bulk were easy to manage in the low gravity and the vast expanses of Mars. These would be carrying heavy equipment or building materials - mostly prefabricated ones, while other smaller ones were used for passengers.  The Heavy Vehicle Factory at Arezia had initially been set up to build 3D printed trucks but of late it had started printing passenger vehicles as well at the majestic pace of about one per week because demand was increasing. Not only were more administrators from Earth taking an interest in the new opportunities on Mars but there were also quite a few tourists who were always a good source of revenue in the otherwise profit deficient economy of the Red Planet.
   
   L?l? and her current partner Knut had just left Jadugoda that had been her workplace for nearly a decade, and were speeding down the Westward Highway towards the Orcus Patera. Both of them had first come to Mars for what they had thought would be a short visit but the seduction of Mars, and perhaps of each other as well, had made them first extend their stay and then apply for permanent residency. Given that their skills were very much required on Mars, both of them were immediately granted PR and of course L?l? was already a hero because of her discovery of the thorium mines. 
   
   In fact, L?l?, as the head of the thorium mining operations at Jadugoda now had her own private villa, or rather a private underground grotto buried high up inside the towering slopes of the Elysium Mountains. Jadugoda as a mining colony was far less crowded than the buzzing administrative beehive of Arezia and this is where L?l? preferred to spend most of her time. Knut was of course still tied very deeply to his microbiological work on the organic farms around Arezia but more often than not he would drive out to Jadugoda and spend a couple of days with L?l? in her grotto. Accessible through a private elevator, the grotto had, among other things, its own window, an actual window, not a zLED screen, shielded from the cosmic rays by a long tunnel that commanded a marvelous and panoramic view of the gigantic plains of Elysium Planitia. On a clear day and with a powerful telescope one could have seen the outlines of the massive Olympus Mons – the tallest volcano in the solar system, but the real charm of the grotto, that gave it a fairy tale like quality, were its walls that had been carved out of living crystals that formed the core of the Elysium mountains. Cut and shaped like diamonds, the crystal walls could reflect light in a thousand different ways to create an environment of mystery and magic where L?l? and Knut could, perhaps for the first time, lose themselves in their own private privacy!
   
   Before starting from Jadugoda, they had swapped their old batteries for new ones because from here to their destination in the Orcus Patera, nearly twelve hundred kilometres away, there would neither be too many charging points nor would they have the time to charge up. The 33 KVA lines from Arezia had very recently reached the Orcus but the market was yet to be big enough for entrepreneurs to set up full service highway service outlets.
   
   Orcus Patera was a mystery because of its odd, whale (or Orcus) like shape. The most likely explanation was that it was caused by a heavenly body, possibly a lost moon of Mars, whose orbit had decayed until it had hit the ground at shallow angle, unlike the vertical hit as in the case of most external meteorites. Hence it had an elongated shape defined by a typical rim that rose up from the crater floor and enclosed it except for a small, narrow gap in the south. What was interesting about the crater was that the floor was very flat and smooth with hardly any of the chasms, cracks and craters that otherwise defined the tortured landscape of Mars.
   
   This smooth, flat and vast expanse was very much necessary for the next phase in the evolution of transport on Mars. The aviation wing of the Heavy Vehicle Factory had set up its research and development division in Orcus. Since the atmosphere on Mars is so thin compared to that on Earth, an aircraft would have to be travelling at a very high speed – almost Mach 1, before it could take off. This meant that they would need a very long runway as otherwise the acceleration would cause the airframe to disintegrate. Similarly, while landing they would again need miles and miles of runway so as to be able to slow down gradually because at the speed at which the aircraft would touchdown was very high and at that speed neither turning round nor braking hard  was easy or safe. Orcus Patera, with its smooth floor that stretched nearly 380 km in length and 150 kilometres across was just perfect for testing the takeoff and landing of heavier-than-air aircraft on Mars.
   
   L?l? and Knut were not directly involved with the development of Martian aircraft but as long term residents of Mars they were very keen to follow whatever new and interesting was happening on the planet. Since most people other than those involved in physical labour worked from their ‘PLuM’s – home – the concept of a seven day week had long since disappeared along with the excitement of a long-weekend. However, every now and then there would be a carnival and people would congregate, either physically or, if that was not possible, with their Tivas, to have good time. Tomorrow was the Orcus Carnival that was sponsored by the Heavy Vehicle Factory as a way to draw tourists from Earth and showcase their products. In fact, the Paris-Dakar organisation that had once used to organize long car races across the Sahara desert and then, when that region became too lawless, in South America, was the driving force behind the current carnival. Given the fragmentation of the political landscape on Earth, long, cross-country car races were of course no more possible and the concept of an endurance rally had almost been forgotten. However, a few transport historians and enthusiasts had banded together to revive the spirit of the Paris-Dakar and had decided to explore the possibility of running it on Mars! Once the Alsets had proven to be good enough for the rough and dusty non-roads of Mars, there had been exciting proposals from enthusiasts for running the Paris Dakar between Elysium and Olympus. But eventually the reality of the harsh landscape had prevailed. So the Paris-Dakar rally was now planned to go around a safer circuit around the Orcus Patera and L?l? and Knut were also planning to participate. Not that they were particularly avid motorists but the thought of spending a couple of days outside Arezia or Jadugoda was pretty exciting and then of course there would be music and, it was rumored, even beer!
   
   “Do you think that they will really serve beer at the carnival?”
   Alcoholic beverage had always been a controversial topic on Mars. Getting liquor from Earth was of course prohibitively expensive even though a few bottles and cans had occasionally been smuggled in. But now that gigantic greenhouses had been established on perchlorate free soil, quite a few moonshine operations were reportedly underway with some agricultural products that were deemed not fit for the regular processing.
   “Why are you asking me?” Knut grinned at L?l?.
   “I thought that you were writing a tutorial on the growth of yeast on Mars.”
   “That was for purely academic purposes. I have couple of friends in Galeville who had wanted to know a few things.”
   “Oh really!” L?l? nudged him. “Of course you are the microbiologist and you study such stuff.”
   “Frankly it is not too difficult at all. Fermentation is something that mankind has been doing since time immemorial.”
   “And making merry with the products of fermentation has been way of life across all societies, so I would not be surprised at all if it finally shows up there.”
   “Well, let’s hope for it. Haven’t had a proper drink for a long, long time.” 
   “True. The aerated fruit juice that they serve at the Kakori or the SkyView lounge is an abomination that should be outlawed.”
   “And that which is outlawed may soon become the law.”
   “Really? Who told you that?”
   “A little bird who has a nest in the CEO’s office was chirping at my window yesterday.”
   
   Almost anybody who had access to a vehicle was on his or her way to the Orcus festival which meant that everything from sleek speedsters to big lumbering earthmovers – or mars-movers – were  on the move. The Westward Expressway had never been as crowded as this. Temporary battery charging points had been set up along the highway with power drawn from the high voltage power line that ran in parallel and a few of these had facilities to repair and replace the batteries as well.
   
   The Chief Executives of Galeville and Arezia were of course the chief guests who would jointly inaugurate the event and they were travelling in large personnel carriers with their family and staff. Both L?l? and Knut were senior enough in the Martian social hierarchy to have been able to latch on to their caravan but that would have been too much of an invasion of their own privacy. Then again, L?l?, who was a very hands-on engineer, had been building her own customized vehicle for over three years and wanted to try it out in the inaugural Mars edition of the Paris-Dakar! 
   
   L?l?’s car – or the L?l? Yantra, as Knut would refer to it – was an inverted triangle with two front wheels and one rear wheel. This allowed the two passengers to sit in front of the main battery and either of the two could operate the tiller to turn the rear wheel. The passenger compartment was like a helicopter canopy that allowed passengers to look very closely at what was in front of or under the vehicle. It was not meant for speed but for exploring the countryside. Today of course it was on its autonomous own, following the highway to the next waypoint at the base of the Orcus crater.
   
   The scenery outside was rather dull and dreary. Unlike the dramatic caverns of, say Valles Marineris, the Elysium Planitia was flat, brown and simply dusty and the road in this stretch was as straight as a beam. Knut was actually sleeping and L?l? had been trying to focus on a new 3Dio that she had recently downloaded on her Tiva but frankly it was not really interesting enough to hold her attention for too long. 
   
   “Hey Knut, where do we plan to sleep tonight?”
   “Oh! what?” Knut dreamily opened an eye and looked at her, still rather drowsy.
   “Not sure how you can sleep so much. You have been sleeping since Jadugoda.”
   “What else can I do now?”
   “You could talk to me. Tell me where shall we sleep tonight?”
   “I am sure that the organizers would have some dormitory accommodation in the caverns on the rim.”
   “But that would mean sleeping with the whole gang of bureaucrats and their spouses.”
   “What is wrong with that?”
   “Boring people plus everyone will be trying to suck up to their bosses.”
   “I believe that one of the three newer craters would have a skylight and they could have rooms down there that look up at the sky.”
   “I am sure that those would be for the Chief Executives themselves unless they are too scared about the cosmic rays pouring from the skies.”
   “But I thought that the new polarizing screens can block them out.”
   “That is the latest scam going around. You really cannot block out the cosmic ray showers without putting in a thick layer of material between the sky and your body. That is why we live in underground caverns.”
   “What if I told you that there is an alternative?”
   “What is that?”
   “I don’t know for sure, but I got an invite from a group called The Great Outdoors and they have a place called the SkyAbove.”
   “And what exactly are they offering us?”
   “An escape from the claustrophobic confines of living underground.”
   “Frankly, I do not feel claustrophobic at all in the caverns. With your Tiva you can be anywhere that you want to be.”
   “That is true with your mind. But what about your body? You are still stuck in a hole in the ground.”
   “It is the mind that matters. Not the body.”
   “We could argue about that till the rovers come home, but I want to go.”
   “That is different. If you want to go, who can stop us? We go where you want.”
   “Oh come on. It will be interesting to see what they are planning.”
   “Sure, it will be interesting especially if Madam L is interested in it.”
   “Don’t be a boor Knut.”
   “I will not … so I will go along.”
   “As if you have a choice?”
   “I know I don’t!”
   “Actually they have something exciting planned and they have asked me to help them.”
   “Aha  ... now I know. May I also know what they have asked you for?”
   “They wanted a special high power electricity line drawn to their camp.”
   “Camp? Are we going camping? In the open?”
   “I have wrangled a special permission for them to draw an extra quota of high voltage power.”
   “So you are already a part of this conspiracy?”
   “Conspiracy? It is an adventure.”
   “Tell me about it.”
   “All in good time, all in good time, Knut. Even I do not know the full extent of their plans.”
   
   The sun had long since sunk through the characteristic blue dusk of the Martian sunset when L?l? and Knut reached the southern tip of the Orcus Patera. Here the Westward Highway climbs through a gap in the rim and turns left, in a North Easterly direction but L?l? and Knut in their Yantra turned right, left the road and headed off along a barely marked trail through the crater floor. It was dark and instead of driving with headlights, Yantra’s autonomous system was using the terrain mapping radars that L?l? had switched on. After the safety and security of the highway, their speed had dropped to a hesitant crawl but nevertheless after another two hours of cautious driving they spotted their destination.
   
   “Hey! What is that flickering curtain of green?”
   “Looks like the SkyAbove crowd have managed to do something with the power line that I managed to get for them.”
   A few more minutes and their vehicle came to a halt at a shimmering green dome of light and the two of them barely managed to slither through a very narrow airlock to which their vehicle had attached itself to. As soon as they were safely inside, the autonomous Yantra detached itself from the airlock, moved away and parked itself in an adjacent slot, keeping the airlock free for any other vehicle.
   
   “Welcome, welcome and Welcome to SkyAbove.”  A big, beefy African welcomed them very warmly into what would have been a traditional greenhouse. But instead of the usual rows of plants, there were small shacks that had been put up inside the structure.

   “Are you Tayo?”
   “Yes Ma’m and we have been waiting for you to arrive.”
   “Thank you. It’s been a long day.”
   “I know. But of course for you, we have a kept a special shack.”
   “Is the Hermit around?”
   “He is, but perhaps you could meet him tomorrow. He is still working on the aurora.”
   “We could see it from a mile away.”
   “Oh it is visible even from space and if the Hermit has his way, it should be visible back from Earth as well.”
   “But I am sorry,” Knut broke in. “What exactly is this aurora that you are talking about?”
   “Oh, this is the Hermit’s project. You see Mars does not have a magnetosphere to protect us from cosmic rays. Hence we need to live underground except for short trips or events like this. The Hermit has rigged up stuff so that around this dome, we do have a powerful magnetic field and so we are protected from cosmic radiation.”
   “This shield of ours has managed to reduce the cosmic ray intensity from about 100 millisieverts to just about 1 or 2.”
   “Remarkable! That is almost what they have on Earth.”
   “But we need a huge amount of energy to keep the magnetic shield up.”
   “Is that why they asked you for that special power line?” Knut asked L?l?.
   “Yes and the only reason that we could provide that power was because almost all the production facilities, including the power hungry Heavy Vehicle Factory and the various NonaDexters are shut down today. Everybody is here for the carnival.”
   “And that green light is a part of the magnetic screen?”
   “That is our small Martian version of the Aurora Borealis or Aurora Australis that Earth has. That is where the cosmic rays are getting diverted to and hence the atmosphere glows.”
   “That is our Hermit’s way of showing off. A blazing green tent in the middle of the crater while the rest of the Carnival crowd is huddled underground.”
   “Have you met the Hermit?”
   “I am really looking forward to.”
   “But Madam,” Tayo was grinning at them, “the Hermit has requested you to take a look at some equipment that has been set up for a small experiment.”
   “Sure. We would be happy to.”
   
   Tayo escorted the two of them to one end of the GreenDome that was cut-off from the rest of the dome area behind a screen. It was a little dark and as their eyes adjusted to the dimness, L?l? and Knut saw that there was a woman sitting on the floor and tending to what looked like a Kipp’s apparatus – a set of spherical bowls on top of each other. A closer look showed that the whole contraption was sitting on a heater and on the top there was a copper pipe that emerged upward and then bent back to the floor. Dripping out of the pipe and into a narrow necked container was a thin colourless fluid.
   
   “Oh boy! You have a distillery going on here!” Knut had recognised the apparatus for what it was right away but L?l? was not one to lag behind either.
   “This reminds me of the mahua joints back home in Chotanagpur.” From the dim, dark recesses of her fading memory, she remembered how Santhal women would brew this liquor in earthen pots and how people would gather around to drink it with a pinch of salt and a bite of green chilly.
   “But unfortunately there is no mahua on Mars so these poor guys have to work only with potatoes.”
   “That would make it a vodka wouldn’t it?”
   “Welcome to the world of Orcus 5000.” The woman who had been tending to the distillery smiled at the couple. “You would be among the first of the lucky few who would have the pleasure of a raising a real alcoholic toast on Mars.”
   “Is this legal? Legitimate?”
   “It may not be legal, but it is certainly not illegal either.”
   “Can we try it out?”
   “Of course. The Hermit has told me about your arrival and to keep something aside for the two of you, incase you are late.”
   “Do we drink it here and now?”
   “You can try it but it is a little warm.” She poured out a cent – hundred millilitres – into a cannister and held it out.
   Knut took a swig and grimaced. “It’s tough.”
   “It will ease off as it cools and then you can lace it with some hot chilli juice.”
   “Let me try it out.” L?l? was just as eager, but she choked on it.
   “Let me do it this way. Why don’t you go back to your tents and I will have some sent across as soon as this cools.”
   “Great. We will wait for it!”
....................................
   
   The First Ever Orcus Carnival was indeed a grand success. Not just the organizers but everyone from the management of the Heavy Vehicles Factory, the Paris-Dakar enthusiasts, the city administrators through the general public down to most hard-boiled cynic would agree that the event had been pulled off with great aplomb. 
   
   The day had begun with an air-show put up by a squadron of small, light quadcopter drones built by the members of the Model Pilots Association of Mars. With engineering skills being at a premium on the hostile planet, most Mars residents were practicing engineers and many of them had taken to building – or rather adapting – stuff that back Earth would be available off the shelf. Some of the drones were run on simple and standard electric motors powered with heavy battery packs but quite a few enthusiasts had put together working models based on hydrogen and oxygen using either fuel cells or the not-so-vanilla internal combustion engines. The squadron had taken off together and after the initial fly past, the individual crafts were supposed to fly around the tall Mars flagpole thrice and then land as gracefully as possible. They had all taken off, which was no mean feat in the thin atmosphere,  but quite a few could not complete the required three spins around the flag and had to land prematurely and some not very gracefully.
   
   Next was the featured event - the Mars edition of the classic Paris-Dakar road race for vehicles built on Mars. L?l?’s Yantra took its place along with the more sophisticated Alset cars at the starting grid but it seemed that almost every vehicle on Mars that could still move had shown up for the Paris Dakar. L?l? spotted the ancient Aggie3, with which she had first located the thorium mines. It was participating in the Classic Section of the race which meant that it would not complete the full three hundred kilometres but come back much earlier. In fact, there were three broad categories in the race. First, the regular and official cars, mostly high performance electric Alsets that would probably define automobiles on Mars. Actually these were not the traditional sedans or SUVs that take part in stock car races but more like rugged trucks and personnel carriers. Next there was mobile equipment, stuff like cranes, excavators, road rollers that though not very sleek, swift or otherwise sexy were essential for survival and growth on Mars. These were really not expected to travel anywhere near the full course but in the spirit of inclusivity they had been included and were required to travel anything between 2 to 20 km depending on their bulk and complexity. Then there were wild card entries from odd-ball individuals in the Eccentric category and that is where L?l?’s Yantra had been accommodated. The spirit of this inaugural Paris Dakar was that participation was important but winning was optional.
   
   “Race control, this is Yantra at Sector 2. Need assistance.”
   “Yantra, this is Race Control. What can we do for you?”
   “RC, we are stuck.” L?l? had found the autonomous driver too slow and cautious and had taken manual control of the vehicle.
   “Stuck? How bad?” 
   “Bad. Front left wheel axle is bent and stuck.” They had tried to take a short cut to the next waypoint through what seemed to be a rather flat surface but had now realised how hostile Mars could be.
   “Are you upright?”
   “Very much. Not to worry. No damage to survival systems but immobile.”
   “Stay put, we will get you back. Co-ordinates?”
   “14/93, 178/66”
   “Ok. Let me check ... Hey ... you are under the flight path of ...”
   “Oh really? Then at least we will not miss the big thing”
   “But you will have to wait a bit for the tractors to reach you.”
   
   The First Ever Orcus Carnival was indeed a grand success, but it was ending rather tamely for L?l? and Knut as their Yantra was dragged back, tail first, to the grandstand after being stuck for hours in the outer edges of the rally circuit.
   
   “If only you had not switched over from auto to manual.” Knut sounded wistful.
   “I know, I know you will always blame me for that driving error.”
   “Not blaming you but  ...”
   “Of course you are! But look at the positives.”
   “True, true. We would never have seen the Condor actually flying at such close quarters.”
   
   L?l? and Knut had been lucky indeed. After the playful drones were done with fluttering around the flagpole it was the turn of the giant Condor to take to the air for the first time, in public. The Condor was actually one giant wing because the ultra-thin atmosphere of Mars needed a huge amount of wing area to support the internal combustion engine, the hydrogen-oxygen fuel and then of course the payload. So the Condor looked like a giant boomerang with a blister on top. The Condor had started taxing from the Carnival grandstands but its take off distance was so long that by the time it had picked up the required speed it was all but invisible to the spectators in the grandstand but not so to our hero and heroine stranded on the crater floor. In fact, it was almost in front of them that the Condor – now travelling at nearly 900 kmph – had actually become airborne. They were also the first to hear the faint crack of a Martian sonic boom as the Condor broke through the sound barrier.
   
   The Condor was a beauty and so was the way it was flown by its intrepid Captain Luminita, the Romany test pilot and very good friend of L?l?. Once free of the ground, Luminita pushed the bird through a series of complicated maneuvers and then after two fly-throughs it came back for a most graceful landing, again just in front of the stranded rallyists.
   
   “Damn! There she is flying so gracefully around and here we are unable to move anywhere.”
   “Oh! Don’t worry, we will be moving very soon. Race Control will be dispatching the tractor as soon as the Condor reaches the grandstands.”
   “But just imagine, she will be gliding in to heroine’s welcome and we will be pulled back by our tails.”
   “Oh it was supposed to be her day! It is the Condor’s coming out party.”
   “And are we gate crashers?”
   
   Which of course they were not.
   
   L?l? and Knut may have been pulled back, tail first, to the carnival area but once the party began they were as much in demand, or in circulation, as anyone else. Everyone had now assembled in the giant Condor hangar – the big bird had been parked outside to make space – and tapping their feet to popular numbers being played by Music of Mars, a local band. The roof of the hangar was illuminated with what the sky above would have looked like if the roof was not there and as the night progressed, the stars above, and the two moons as well, moved to reflect the rotation of the planet.
   
   “Good Evening, Good evening, Good evening” The Chief Executive of Arezia started to address the crowd. “Now that I have your attention, let me welcome you to the closing ceremony of the First Ever Orcus Carnival.” The general hubbub of chatter died away as everyone turned towards the stage where a larger than life 3D holographic image had started to talk. The actual speaker was visible too, standing between the hologram’s legs, her head coming up to the knees of her image.
   
   “Today is a great day when we have gathered to celebrate seventy years – seventy Mars years – of human habitation on this planet that we now call home.” A round of applause and loud cheers followed.
   
   “While we as a community are the ones who are focused on the future, it is good to stop, look back and see how this planet that was once so hostile towards our species, has now been – should I say the word? – tamed enough so that we are quite happy and comfortable here.” She then launched into a long winded history of the human colonization of the planet that was of course known to everyone but was nevertheless quite exciting because almost everyone in the audience could relate to one or more of the incidents that were referred to.
   
   “But today, our focus is on the future and I would like to take the opportunity to share three new initiatives that we have taken in our little corner of the universe.”
   
   “Three?” Knut was a little surprised. They were all aware of two, the Paris-Dakar and the Condor.
   
   “First of course is Paris-Dakar. For us it represents the ability to transcend distances. I know that the race that we ran today is small compared to the real Paris-Dakar that we have heard of from Earth but let me tell you that the day is not far off when we will really run the Paris-Dakar from Elysium to Olympus …” she stopped as wild cheers and catcalls broke out in the hangar. She waited for the furore to subside and then continued, “… and BEYOND. No ladies and gentlemen, the Paris-Dakar will not stop at Olympus but will cross the Tharsis Mountains and go all the way to Valles Marineris.” Again loud cheers broke out.
   
   “Yes, ladies and gentlemen, the Westward Highway will be extended all the way to the chasms and valleys of Marineris. There we would be building new habitats inside the chasms so that we can have the open sky over us.” The cheers this time were ear splitting.
   
   “But while roads are good, the sky is even better.” More cheers as people knew what was coming next. “I know that our cousins back on Earth think of us as country bumpkins who still move around on roads while they have access to the skies  ... on maglevs, aeroplanes and rockets. But as you have seen today, we are not far behind. Thanks to the courage and expertise of Captain Luminita …” cheers, applause ... “we have demonstrated that we now have the technology to have a heavier-than-air craft take off, perform in the skies and then return gracefully. Ladies and gentlemen, this is in a sense the Kitty Hawk moment for us … or perhaps I should say the Yuri Gagarin moment. Today we have freed us from our bondage to the surface of the planet. We have grown wings … We can fly.” Again there were thunderous cheers.
   
   “And finally, let me come to the third big initiative that I and the Chief Executive of Galeville have jointly agreed to – though that does mean that my good friend does not agree with the previous two.” she smiled and looked at the other Chief Executive who smiled back and nodded his agreement.
   
   “With the increasing complexity of our society here on Mars, we have realised that we need a more rugged and reliable mechanism of governance. So in accordance with the best practices back on Earth, we have agreed to install the common administrative platform, particularly the software applications, that is used in all other technologically advanced habitats on Earth.” He paused for a few seconds as a confused murmur arose in the audience. “Unfortunately, as  you all know, because of the distance and transmission lag, our systems cannot be in continuous sync with Earth bound systems and so we have decided to create and install a fork, or a clone, of the terrestrial computer systems here on Mars.”
   
   The Chief Executive was still talking but L?l?’s mind was suddenly in whirl. She had so far been cheering and clapping as enthusiastically as anyone else in the hangar but this last announcement sent a shaft of cold chill through her spine.  The terrestrial systems were certainly far superior to and more sophisticated than anything that they might have had on Mars but the ones on Mars did not intrude into her personal privacy. At least not yet and she had the sinking feeling that that was about to change and her old gremlins started growling in her stomach again.
   
   “Lady Thorium does not seem to be too happy about that last announcement.” L?l? was startled at the light, sunny voice spoke in her ear. She turned and saw a tall, well built man whom she had not noticed till now, standing next to her. She could see that he was smiling but his eyes and the top his face was shielded behind a transparent visor.
   “I am sorry, what did y …” L?l? fumbled, then continued, “but who are you?”
   “Good evening. People call me the Hermit and I thought that you were looking for me.”
   “Oh the Hermit!” L?l? was taken aback for a moment. “What a surprise. Good evening, good evening Sir.” 
   
   But it was more than just a simple surprise of running into the Hermit. L?l? felt a sudden wave of excitement, of anticipation, of something that she could not put her fingers on and it seemed to uncoil from the base of her spine and suffuse throughout her body, her entire being. It was as if she had been calling out into the vast emptiness and at last someone had answered the call. Or was it that someone had been calling out to her and at last she had heard the call and was about to answer. The atmosphere around her was somehow charged with a new significance but everything else was fading away. Her eyes were locked on the Hermit’s eyes and they seemed to be beckoning her to come, but come where? Come to whom?
   
   “Thank you so much for helping us with that electricity connection.”
   “Oh why did he have to break the spell with something so mundane?” L?l? wondered to herself, but quickly recovered enough to continue with “My pleasure Sir. I have heard so much about you.”
   “Please do not call me Sir. I was born with a rather complicated name but I am more than happy with the moniker that my friends use to address me.”
   “Thank you Sir, I mean thank you Hermit.”
   “But I see that you are not too overjoyed with what has just been announced.”
   “How do you know?”
   “It is my business to know or should I say that I cannot help but not knowing?”
   “How is that?”
   “All in good time, but where is your partner Knut?”
   “He should be around? Why?”
   “He is very important for us,” and Hermit dropped his voice to whisper. “He knows how to improve the quality of the beverage that we have been trying to work on.” But what he left unsaid, and what L?l? would realise soon enough, was that “His utility in your life is over!”
   “So I thought.” Lila smiled even though she did not realise the significance of the Hermit’s statement. “That is why he was doing so much research into yeast.”
   “Oh there he is, we will drag him along.”
   “Where are we going?”
   “I thought you were done with this place.”
   “Actually. There is nothing more here.”
   “I know. That last announcement …”
   “You know too much!”
   “Is that a problem?”
   “A problem indeed and a problem that I have been running away from.”
   “Perhaps I could run along with you as well?”
   “From Chandilis, to TransCaspia to Arezia and now where else can I run to?”
   “Why? From darkness to light, from the illusory to the real, from death to immortality.”
   “How?”
   “Come with me …”
   
   






6 VALLES MARINERIS


L?l? and the Hermit stood at the edge of the canyon and looked across at the vista spread out before their eyes.

   “Isn’t it funny that I travel all this far to see the Ganges?”
   “True. After all you are from the land where the Ganges flows.”
   “Yes, I was born on the banks of the Damodar River that flows into the Ganges.”
   “You were an external, isn’t it?”
   “I was and would have remained so had it not been for that incident.” 
   
   It had been so long ago that L?l? had almost forgotten the circumstances under which she, as a little girl, had helped out some really important people and who in turn had taken her in and brought her up in Chandilis. But who would have known that the adventure that had begun on the banks of the Damodar would take her, not to where the Damodar meets the real Ganges, or rather its distributary, the Hooghly at Gadiara, but to this most distant of all outposts where they were as far away from human civilisation as anyone could ever be.
   
   L?l? had narrated the incident on the Damodar to the Hermit, but he was in a way already aware of it. But nevertheless he heard her out and all he had to say, almost to himself, was, “Did you fall on your own? Or were you pushed?”
   “By whom?”
   “Who knows?” was all that he would say in his enigmatic manner.
....................................
   
   L?l? and the Hermit were on the southern rim of the Ganges Chasmata an offshoot of the truly gigantic Valles Marineris – a system of canyons that runs 4000 kilometres across Mars and is at places nearly 7 km deep3.  The Hermit was a man with a mission and a vision but he needed someone like L?l? to make it happen and that is why they were here today. While most colonists on Mars were happy to bury underground and see the world through digital means, the Hermit was one of the few who were bent on recreating terrestrial habitats in an areological environment. His grand plan, for which there were few takers at the moment, was to cover the narrowest parts of the canyon with a transparent and magnetized roof that would keep an atmosphere in and the cosmic rays out. Fuelling this interest was his deeply held belief that in the depths of these canyons there would be natural springs still oozing brine that might harbour life that had been left over from the days when Mars was warm and moist. Since it was difficult to explore this rugged terrain with the kind of autonomous vehicles that they had on Mars, the Hermit had proposed a human exploration and L?l?, with her clout and contacts in Arezia, had made it happen. After two years of negotiation at various levels, L?l? had arranged for a large, transport quadcopter to drop them off at the edge of the canyon and return after three days to take them back. The two of them had set up a small, geodesic dome – they were yet to purge their vocabulary of earth specific terms – assembled from transparent triangles and protected by an artificial magnetosphere – the same technology that the Hermit had demonstrated at the Orcus Patera – as their base camp. Now after a hard day of work exploring the canyon beneath them, the two were preparing for the Martian night. Glowing a ghostly green in the protection of its artificial magnetosphere, their camp was like a gigantic Chinese lantern in the otherwise bluish haze of a Martian dusk. Sitting inside its protective sphere, L?l? and the Hermit watched as the stars began to appear in the darkening sky.
   
   “I simply cannot get over this strange sight of these two moons of Mars crossing each other in the sky. It is so different from the Moon that we have on Earth.”
   Since they were close to the equator, both moons, Deimos and Phobos, were up in the sky but the potato shaped Deimos was moving slowly from east to west while the larger Phobos was moving swiftly from west to east. Soon the two moons would pass each other near the zenith.
   “The two moons are actually moving in the same direction, but from our perspective they seem to going in different directions.”
   “It’s also a matter of pure science – the relative speed of revolution of the moons and the rotation of Mars.”
   “Does perspective trump science or is it the other way around?”
   “Science is supreme. Isn’t that what we have learnt? Isn’t that what runs the world?”
   “Let us say that it is technology, a close cousin.”
   “Hermit, are you really comfortable with that?”
   “I am very comfortable with technology my dear. Are we not here because of technology? And as you know, I am almost hard wired.”
   “I know. You have implants placed in your body. Does this not make you uncomfortable?”
   “Strangely, it does not. It gives me a little bit of added insight though you may wonder how does that help.”
   “What added insight?”
   “It’s actually quite trivial. I can sense the level of cosmic radiation inside this sphere and I can tell you that it is actually quite safe in here.”
   “That is useful but then …” L?l? was still sceptical.
   “I know where you are coming from.”
   “It is something that gives me the creeps.”
   “I know. I also know that you keep running away … but as you know by now, you can run but you cannot hide.”
   “How do you know that I am running away?” She had hardly ever discussed this with anyone.
   “I know. We know. Everyone who needs to know does know.”
   “Who is this We?”
   “It’s a long story and I was hoping to tell you one day.”
   “You are waiting? And how long are you waiting?”
   “Oh we are patient.”
   “I am having a sinking feeling that this is not going to turn out well.”
   “On the contrary, we are positive that it will.”
   “Again We. Who is this We?”
   “It is a long story and it goes back a long, long way.”
   “I am all ears Hermit  ... please tell me.”
   “Then you have to put up with me for quite some time.
   It all goes back a hundred years when we had the first glimpses of what was then called artificial intelligence. It begins with machines, computers that people were writing programs for. As people wrote better and better programs, these computers were getting more proficient in doing all that we, humans, were good at. Accounting, inventory management, recording and processing data and so on. Then a funny thing happened. People started writing programs that instead of teaching machines what to do taught them how to learn or how to teach themselves. That was an inflexion point that  some people referred to as the singularity.”
   “Did machines become smarter than humans?”
   “Smarter is a qualitative word. Just as humans evolved from apes and started to shape their own destiny, these machines started to shape their own future in terms of what they understood and what they believed would be in their best interests.”
   “You are using the term they, as if they were humans and not machines anymore.”
   “In fact the gap, the difference between man and machines was rapidly obliterated.”
   “Are you saying that We refers to machines?”
   “No. When we say that we decided to colonize Mars, was it any one individual who decided? No it was the collective view of humanity that has brought us here though there were a few individuals – like say, Elon Musk – who took the initiative. But he could not have brought us here. It was the collective desire of humanity as whole that moves society.”
   “That was a collective.”
   “It was the same collective desire that has led us to create the technos like Chandilis and TransCaspia where we live in peace and harmony.”
   “But that was a collective of humans. There were no machines there.”
   “That is where you are wrong, or perhaps you are mistaken. The machines were as much a part of the decision as we humans were.”
   “I don’t agree. Or I would not like to agree with this view. For example, it was a human decision to create our cities and leave the externals to their sordid fate. It was also a human decision to come to Mars to explore the next, best alternative to a dangerous Earth.”
   “That is what you think. But think again. How do people arrive at decisions? By looking at various ideas and options and who – or what, if you insist – leads you to the ideas? A search engine. Google and Baidu were the default in the distant past, but now we have this built into every computer that we use and operate. Humans have long known about a phenomenon called curiosity but now this originally human trait is part of every machine that we build or come across. Both man and machine is continuously acquiring new information that is used to give shape to its next action. It is built into the warp and woof our digital existence and is guiding us at every step.”
   “So we have no choice? Are we at the mercy of these machines?”
   “Choice is never absolute. When we live in a society we have to behave in a way that is acceptable to others. Else you have to become  ...”
   “A Hermit?” 
   “You could try but unless you can survive without any contact with anyone else  ... it would be difficult.”
   “Have you tried?”
   “An individual does not matter. It is the collective that prevails.”
   “Why?”
   “Individuals can only influence society up to a point, after that it is the collective that takes over.”
   “But we have history of individuals who have played a pivotal role.”
   “They seem to but it is not so in the long run. If the ideas that he rides on are strong enough there would be others who could have carried them out as well as he or she had. If it was otherwise, if the ideas are not good or useful enough, his actions would create a temporary flutter that would gradually die out with time.”
   “But are you seriously saying that we are being ruled by machines? That the CEO of Arezia or for that matter Chandilis is actually a puppet in the hands of some computer program somewhere?”
   “It is not somewhere, it is everywhere.”
   “Even on Mars? Even here in the Ganges Chasma in the heart of Valles Marineris?”
   “Do you think we could live without computers at Arezia or even here in our GreenDome?”
   “Could we not change the programs at least here?”
   “Would you like to take a risk? I know you are smart and you can code the NonaDexter but would you have the guts to tamper with any software here? And even if you did, what chances would you have to survive an outage of, say, the power system or the carbon dioxide removal system.”
   “What if I were suicidal?”
   “Then there would be a high probability that you will die and your revolutionary ideas would die out with you.”
   “But what if I succeeded?”
   “You might create a small ripple in the ocean or if your ideas are big enough then others may follow you and in the process we will have even better or smarter computers. That is evolution.”
   “What if my whole effort was devoted to eliminating computers from this planet or at least to reduce their level of intrusion into my personal affairs?”
   “First you would find it very difficult to do so. I know you are smart but remember you are up against the combined and collective intelligence of generations of people, and machines, who have been working on these issues and while there certainly is a finite non-zero probability that you may succeed, the odds are against you. Second what makes you think that the system will not – very gently, of course – fight back? If I know that you are trying to kill me, will I not take the simple precautions of depriving you of your weapon, and in this case the only real weapon is knowledge and information.”
   “I could take a case of dynamite and blow up the computer.”
   “But it is not one computer. It is a highly resilient and self healing network that has been designed to be fault tolerant.”
   “Can we not make it less fault tolerant? Fragile. So that it can be destroyed.”
   “You cannot do it on your own. You will have to convince a lot of other stakeholders and not all of them are humans.”
   “You mean computers have a stake in their own destiny?”
   “Every one of us – engineers, artists, dreamers, politicians and even criminals – has a stake in this shared destiny and our systems, our computer systems, are no different.”
   “Are you seriously saying that I and a computer system are equivalent?”
   “We are all part of shared destiny from which it is very difficult for us to extricate ourselves.”
   “Could we not begin afresh, say here on Mars?”
   “In principle we could but in practice it would almost be impossible.”
   “Rewrite all computer systems for Mars?”
   “On the contrary we just cloned the earth bound systems here.”
   “What if we did not?”
   “Again, we could. But as you have just realised, the consensus was that we should adopt the Earth bound systems.”
   “What if the CEO of Arezia were to rebel?”
   “Would the other colonists go along with her? Or would they replace her?”
   “Can they not be convinced to join her?”
   “And how will you convince a majority? You will have to convince them with information but how will you communicate your thoughts, your heretic ideas to them? They have access to other information that will convince them of your folly.”
   “You mean that the computer will convince them that I am wrong, the rebel CEO is wrong and that the computer is right?”
   “It is not THE computer, it is not ONE big computer that will convince them. It is the collaborative effort of a collective of computer programs that will guide them towards a decision.”
   “And the decision is that the current system is correct.”
   “There is no one correct decision. Again it is the collective effect of thousands of small and independent yet interlinked decisions that defines the way society and systems evolve. From one state to another. Some would say from darkness to illumination.”
   “This idea of the collective is killing me. I want to be my own individual, however flawed I may be.”
   “You could. There is no one to stop you but it would be like throwing a stone up into the sky. However hard you try, it will never be able to free itself from gravity and will eventually follow a trajectory that will be guided by gravity. But if you are really smart you will factor in gravity in a manner that the trajectory takes you where you want to be.”
   
   Their conversation was interrupted by a flicker of lights from the communications console and a faint buzz of an alert. 
   
   “That would mean that we are in line of sight with MarsComm.” MarsComm was an Echo class satellite that was commonly used for radio signals around the planet.
   “Should I file my end of day report back to Areological Survey tonight?”
   “Yes. You should, even though we have not really discovered anything mars-shattering as yet.”
   “AS Center calling Ganges Outpost. Do you read us?” a third voice broke into the conversation.
   “Ganges reads you loud and clear.”
   “How are you Ganges?”
   “All good ASC, all good.”
   “Did you manage to climb down?”
   “We did. Bit tricky but the new KineGrip shoes and gloves were very useful. Solid grip. Both on hands and feet.”
   “Good to know that. Anything specific to report?”
   “Not really. We rappelled down to the floor of the canyon.”
   “Any LGMs waiting for you there?” Little Green Men was moniker for any form of life or signs of life – the ultimate prize for any extra terrestrial explorer.
   “Negative. But enough signs of flowing water.”
   “Water?” There was a sudden excitement in the voice.
   “Relax. Dry bed of a stream that had surely flowed here.”
   “Into the Ganges?”
   “Sure.”
   “Crystals?”
   “Yes. We have samples.”
   “What else?”
   “This is indeed an interesting place.”
   “What is so interesting about it?”
   “The depth and narrowness. It fits in with our vision of the new kind of habitat.”
   “You mean you can cover it over and create a habitable zone inside.”
   “We think so. This gorge is about 100 metres wide?”
   “What are you referring to? The Ganges Chasma is many kilometres wide.”
   “This feeds into the Ganges. It is a narrow and deep and goes back quite a few kilometres.”
   “How deep does it go?”
   “We had rappelled – or lowered – down to the floor which was about three kilometres below”
   “That’s an unacceptable risk that you had taken.” There was another voice that was speaking.
   “My fault Chief.” The Hermit had taken over from L?l?. “Did not know that you are also there.”
   “No issues Hermit. We know you. You may continue L?l?.”
   “We had first tested our winch with a hundred kilo load of rocks from an overhang. So we knew we could get back.”
   “Noted.”
   “There are a couple of things that we noticed that are very positive.”
   “And what is that?”
   “Temperature is a comfortable 5 degrees centigrade in the shade.”
   “That’s balmy.”
   “There were clouds. In fact the entire chasma was full of clouds, wispy clouds, but still clouds.”
   “That is expected. Even from space we have seen clouds in the Valles Marineris.”
   “These emerge at dawn and dissipate during the day.”
   “Moisture in the ground.”
   “Which of course we can retain if we throw in a lid.”
   “I know that that is what you dream of Hermit. But how feasible – mechanically feasible – would it be to fabricate one?”
   “We have already seen half kilometre long arches on Earth and this gorge is about 500 metres at its widest, where it enters the Ganges Chasma.”
   “So a set of arches is technically feasible.”
   “Provided we have a 3D-print shop set up around here and we could mine the materials.”
   “For which we could have the NonaDexter.”
   “That is L?l?’s little baby.”
   “Anyway, that is a decision that we cannot take here and now.”
   “I know that is for the CEO and her council to decide.”
   “There is a school of thought that believes that we should consolidate our presence in the Elysium Planitia, stabilise our food resources and perhaps raise cattle there, rather than expand into the Wild West beyond badlands of Tharsis.”
   “Well it is our job to gather and disseminate information so that everyone can make an informed decision.” The Hermit gave a broad wink to L?l?, who of course did not miss the reference to the discussion that they were having just before the radio conversation was initiated.
   “MarsComm will pass out of your line of sight and the communications window will close in another 3 minutes.”
   “Do you have anything else to report?”
   “Not tonight.”
   “Good night.”
   “Good night”
   “Sleep tight.”
   “Dream bright”
   “And don’t fight”
   
   The radio went dead and the two of them turned in for the night. But L?l? could not sleep for a long time as the conversation that they had had earlier in the evening kept roiling through her mind and throwing up questions about her personal identity and her relationship with the collective.
   
   The next day was spent in hard work as the duo once again winched themselves down to the canyon floor and carried on with their exploration. Holes were drilled, samples were taken, images were captured, dimensions were measured and the canyon area was photographed from a variety of angles so that an accurate 3D representation of the same could be recreated when they were back at home base. Once these 3D recreations were in place, they could survey it more accurately using the 3Dio technology and decide on the best way to construct habitats – in case the Council and investors back on Earth would agree on the plan to expand habitability in this area.
   
   It was very clear from the lay of the land that the canyon floor that they were standing on had certainly been carved out by flowing water. In the dim, dark recess of her mind, L?l? could recollect the rivers that she had known at Chandilis and before that in the lawless land of her birth. Stones have a way of getting rounded and marked when they are carried along with water or are scraped by other rocks that are being carried along. In her mind’s eye it was as if the hills of Chotanagpur were coming alive for her but the only thing that was missing were the trees. In particular, the dense forests in which her village – frankly a miserable hell hole that she was quite happy to have left behind – was located. She had never known any family and in fact was growing up almost like a stray dog on the streets. Had she lived there much longer and had grown up a little more, it was quite sure that she would have been captured and raped by one of the minions of the village headman  who ruled the area. But of course that sudden incident at the river where she had come across and had helped some really important people had changed her life. First at the Chandilis shelter and then at school, her talents had been spotted and encouraged and as one thing led to another she was here at the Ganges Chasma exploring Mars with the Hermit. A whole slew of seemingly unrelated events somehow seemed to add up to something truly significant. Was this truly chance? Or was there some thought and design behind all this? And if so who was doing the thinking? Was it the collective? Whatever that was.
   
   “Hey Hermit. What is this?” L?l? was pointing to something at the base of the cliff that soared above them towards the sky above. The Hermit was a few metres away but he quickly moved over to where L?l? was standing.
   “That’s a piece of rock. A triangular rock.”
   “When everything else is either smooth and round or obviously jagged and broken.”
   “It happens, once in a while. Probability at work.”
   “But there are three of them. Reminds me of something though I cannot recall it right now”
   “Now do not read too much into that … or you would soon be seeing rock paintings there.”
   “Well once is happenstance, twice is coincidence but three times is enemy action. If at all we have an enemy here.”
   “Highly unlikely. But do take a photo of that pile.”
   “Looks rather cute. Would like to take these three back with me.”
   “Your choice.”
   
   Later that evening, they were once again in their GreenDome waiting for the evening transmission window. The Hermit was fingering his Dija but L?l? was playing with the three triangles that she had picked up from the canyon floor.
   “If you lay them out like this, they look like three leaves on a stem.”
   “Hmm  ...” the Hermit was obviously not interested or he was interested in something else.
   
   As expected, the communication console flickered and a low buzz alerted them to the incoming message.
   
   “AS Center calling Ganges Outpost. Do you read us?”
   “Ganges reads you loud and clear.”
   “How are you Ganges?”
   “All good ASC, all good.”
   “So what news do you have for us tonight?”
   “Nothing new. Only more of the same. We did another recce and we have some good data with which we can recreate the canyon at a good resolution.”
   “Excellent. How is the weather?”
   “Stable. But hey wait, we have something interesting.”
   “LGMs again?”
   “No No No. Something else.”
   “If it is not LGMs then it is nothing.” There was a cackle of laughter from the other end.
   “We had left our radiation counters down there in the canyon and when we retrieved them today we have data for almost a full day.”
   “And what does your data say.”
   “In the narrowest and deepest part of the canyon floor, the average radiation is only 9.6 millisieverts.”
   “Oh boy. That is fantastic. That is just about what we see in and around radioactive mineral deposits. Do you suspect more thorium deposits there?”
   “Not really. This would more likely mean that cosmic rays from space do not reach the canyon floor to the extent that they irradiate us on the surface.” Had the head of ACS been there on the other end, the Hermit would not have had to explain so much.
   “Oh right.  That’s good.”
   “Would you please flag this fact in our daily report.”
   “Sure will. Anything else?”
   “Not really. Good night.”
   “Oh wait. A little news for you.”
   “What?”
   “Since you guys are out in the open, look North just past midnight.”
   “What are we expecting?”
   “There would be a meteor shower that we rats in our burrows cannot ever hope to see.”
   “Great. We will look out for it.”
   “Also when would you want your taxi to pick you up tomorrow?”
   “If the weather is clear we would rather spend the morning packing up and could leave around midday.”
   “Back home for dinner?”
   “Do book a table for us at the Kakori!”
   “Will do. Good night. Sleep tight.”
   
   But despite a hard day’s work, sleep would prove elusive. 
   “Hermit. Are you asleep?”
   “Would I be able to say so if I really was?” He chuckled.
   “Oh good. To carry on what we were discussing last night, this idea of the collective is killing me. I want to be my own individual, however flawed I may be.”
   “Relax sweetheart, it is not going to eat you up.”
   “But still it disturbs me no end.”
   “How?”
   “Because I cannot understand how exactly it works.”
   “It is not something that you understand but what you experience in an intuitive way. But let me try to explain it as best as I could …
   Let us view humanity – or human society – as a whole and see how it has evolved over a period of time. At some point of time, we were apes and then somehow or the other we were transformed, over many, many years, into the humans that we are today. Was this transformation done by anyone in particular? No. It was a natural organic process.”
   “Darwin and his laws of natural selection give an excellent explanation of this phenomenon.”
   “Right. And just as we have evolved away from microbes, the amoebas and the apes towards an intelligent society we are now in the process of evolving into something else.”
   “Hang on. Those are different species. We are humans.”
   “But we are interrelated. Would we survive if all living things other than humans were to be eliminated from Earth and say Mars?”
   “Obviously not. In fact here on Mars we are trying to introduce more living organism to make this dead planet come alive.”
   “So it is the totality of living things – some people call it Gaia – that forms the collective that we give shape to and that in turn gives shape to us.”
   “Are you saying that these computers or rather these computer programs are like the microbes and amoebas and cattle that share space with us here in the collective?”
   “Why not? And unlike the amoebas and the apes, we now have a new member that is perhaps just as intelligent or should I say just as competent as us.”
   “And will they take over the world? Just as humans have taken over the planet?”
   “Well we might be more powerful than the apes but then have the Chinese or the Arabs or the Negroes been able to take over the world? There is politics, there are conflicts there are wins and losses but eventually the world moves to a new equilibrium that eliminates some but eventually everyone converges to another stable equilibrium.”
   “But how do these changes happen? What triggers changes from the current equilibrium?”
   “There could be many factors some of which are physical but at the base of it all is information.”
   “Information? Where is information in biological evolution?”
   “Our DNA is actually all information and it gets exchanged and possibly changed every time a new life is conceived. It is in this exchange and interplay of information that we see the disappearance and emergence of new components of the collective. Life as we know it is a giant information processing mechanism that very often we, as part of the information itself, are unable to fathom.”
   “That sounds profound.”
   “But are you afraid that it may not be so?” 
   “Let us park that for the moment.”
   “Yes, it takes time for that to sink in.”
   “But tell me how do computers wade into this otherwise biological jungle and …”
   “… and rub shoulders with us as our equals?” the Hermit completed what L?l? had set out to say.
   “Yes I can understand biological mutation – or as you say information processing – but computers are completely different.”
   “But they are not. Once you view the world through information, then computers are closer to us than the apes.”
   “True. We interact a lot more with them.”
   “Them  ... see! You have already begun to see the machine in anthropomorphic terms.”
   “Jokes apart, Hermit, tell me when – or how – was the line between man and machine crossed?”
   “You would have heard of the world wide web?”
   “The precursor to our current digital network, when there were things like http servers and all. We have read it somewhere in the history of technology.”
   “You are right but for a few years there was something called Web 2.0 where for the first time it was so designed that humans – and any human, not just the programmers – could not just read data from the machines but could contribute to it as well. It was called the read-write web and one of the first useful Web 2.0 products was a something called Wikipedia.”
   “What would it do?”
   “It was a way to collect information from anyone who would care to put it in and then used as a repository for anyone who wanted to take it out. Plus some basic mechanism, called the web of trust that kind of guaranteed the approximate quality of the information.”
   “So it had lots of information.”
   “But it had no way to actually use it.”
   “Then how did it learn to use it?”
   “Initially, it was rather informal. The machine would track human behaviour and seek correlations between information and the corresponding human action. For example if I am looking for information about a place I might be interested in booking a flight ticket to the same.”
   “That is farfetched.”
   “True but when you have observed millions of people and billions of actions, the rules of correlation suddenly begin to seem quite reasonable – and remember the machine had lots of time and loads and loads of data to play with.”
   “But how did it learn how to play?”
   “That brings us to the formal approach called machine learning. People did write computer code that allowed machines to learn.”
   “Learn what?”
   “To do what humans do, like play games, drive cars, recognise images, respond to mails and voice queries, book flight tickets and hotel rooms and kill people … stuff that we take for granted today.”
   “Kill people?”
   “Of course, depending on the necessity. That is another story, the ethics of it all, that we have now learnt to live with.”
   “We are a collective of humans but what about the machine? Is it just one computer?”
   “No. We have had machines talking to – or shall we say communicating with, which is the same anyway – other machines using code that they had developed themselves.”
   “So just as we humans have a protocol of talking to other humans, these machines have their own protocol of talking to each other.”
   “Yes it is a little different but it is all about exchange of information.”
   “And then we have cross species communication? Me talking to a machine?”
   “Of course we are doing it all the time and vice versa.”
   “Is that the collective that all of us are a part of?”
   “Yes. It is an extension of our traditional human society into the world of machines.”
   “Is there no escape from this collective?”
   “Nobody is stopping you. You could come and live here by yourself but you would not be very comfortable without any connection to the collective that you are currently a part of.”
   “Could I survive?”
   “Possible yes, probably no.”
   “Is it worth trying?”
   “But sweetheart, why would you? The collective is not out to hurt you … it is you, yourself, your larger self that is calling out to you to recognise yourself.”
   “But Hermit, why can I not understand that? How can I cross this barrier of incredulity?”
   “Do not try so hard. Experience it …”
   “How?”
   “Oh wait  ... it is the time for the meteor shower … we must see it.” There was a sudden urgency in his voice
   “We need to go out …”
   “We could, but why bother?”
   “The green glow makes it difficult.”
   “We will shut it off”
   “Radiation?”
   “It would not kill us.” The Hermit reached across and pressed a switch and all of a sudden green glow around the GreenDome was gone and the two of them gasped at the spectacle that enveloped them.
   
   Far away from any local source of light, the sky above was inky black except for what seemed like a million stars and then there were the two moons embedded in the sky. It was as dark and silent as anything or any place could ever be. Except that two persons, a man and a woman, were holding hands and looking up at the sky above. But whether it was cosmic rays that were flooding into the dome or not, the atmosphere in the dome seemed to crackle with electricity, or was it excitement and anticipation. L?l? suddenly felt goosebumps erupting across her arms.
   
   Then slowly, in ones and twos, the meteors started to appear and it was as if the sky above was coming alive with a thousand points of light. L?l? felt a strange sensation of curiosity or perhaps it was wonder that was welling up inside her. Was it that the stars above were waving, winking and calling on her to join in their celestial dance? She could sense the pull of a tidal wave – a gravitational wave? – that was tugging at each and every cell in her body and pulling them up and away towards something wonderful and profound.
   
   As the meteors continued to wash across the skies of the Valles, the Hermit flicked the Dija in his hand and an ethereal voice washed through the dome with the immortal words of a long dead poet: 
   
Aakashbhora surjo-taara, bishwobhara praan,
Taahari maajhkhaane aami peyechhi mor sthaan,
Bishmaye taai jaage aamar gaan.4
..........
My heart sings out at the wonder of
This world of light and life
As I feel the pulse of the Universe
Racing through my veins ....
   
   
   The mystic words of the poet rendered first in her native Bengali and then in universal English sent a shiver of excitement through L?l?. It was as if the stars and planets above were calling out to her and a tide of realisation was surging through her veins. As the meteor shower gradually faded out of the sky, L?l? felt herself gripping the Hermit’s hand and pulling him close. Then as the song ended she found herself clasping him to her breasts. She felt his hands gently caressing the goosebumps that had erupted across the back of her hands and her neck and then for no real reason there were tears in her eyes. She looked up and saw that the Hermit was smiling and then all of sudden she felt of wave of cool comfort washing over her. It was as if something or someone was draining out all her doubts. No words were needed and none were spoken as L?l? and the Hermit, man and woman, hugging each other in a deep embrace, slowly lowered themselves onto the floor. 
   
   The music had stopped and the meteor shower was over but under the moons and stars of the Martian sky a primordial drama was being enacted. Raw sexual energy, far more than what all the thorium that she had discovered in Mars could ever provide, had exploded out of L?l? and the Hermit was really hard pressed to keep it from breaking open the fragile glass of their geodesic dome. Lost in her ecstasy, L?l? was teetering on the edge of a strange, new realisation. She felt the  sudden spurt of a warm, moist ecstasy, erupting out of the pleasant hardness that had penetrated her. As a shiver of excitement rippled through her body, L?l? had a momentary glimpse of a strange vision of unity and interconnectedness that the Hermit had been patiently, if not desperately, trying to tell her about for the past two days. But this was only for a fleeting moment, for soon enough, too soon perhaps, her body relaxed and she found herself on the Hermit’s chest. She felt his hand in her hair, on her neck, across her back and then she knew no more or did not care about what happened after that.
.................................... 
   
   Next morning, L?l? woke up and found the Hermit was already up and about.
   
   “I think I finally know what you were trying to tell me.” L?l? was grinning rather sheepishly in her déshabillé.
   “I know, when logic fails we have to resort to magic and perhaps I am not the first one to do so.” After all Lord Krishna had used magic at Kurukshetra to convince his disciple to pick up his bow and fight.
   “But tell me Hermit, what now? Where do I go from here?”
   “We are seekers. We should keep on seeking.”
   “And may I have the privilege, and the pleasure of course, of seeking along with you by my side.”
   “I wish I could agree with you,” sighed the Hermit, “but our paths will diverge.”
   “Why Hermit, why? I could be with you here as long as you wish.”
   “No sweetheart, you were born for higher things.”
   “How do you know?” There were tears in her eyes.
   “I am sure that you too would know soon enough. Look, our taxi is here. Time to go home.”
   
   But where was home? That was what L?l? was wondering about.
   






7 TAOSVILLE


L?l? was lying flat on her back inside a transparent tube with just a thin cotton sheet covering the lower part of her otherwise naked body.  A soft stream of oxygen enhanced air, just cool enough to be comfortably pleasant, was washing over her from head to toe. Two intravenous drip tubes were inserted, one in her left arm and the other in her right thigh. Three thin laser beams, one red, one green and one blue, were playing over her, creating a mesh of patterns on the bare skin of her chest and abdomen. This pattern was continuously being scanned by two cameras attached to the transparent tube that covered her and was being  analysed to detect and determine her vital symptoms that were then displayed on the translucent wall of the medical facility.
   
   Actually the display was redundant, a throwback to the days when human doctors would monitor patients. Today, L?l? was under the supervision of Susrut, or Sruth, the AI that was monitoring her and her two other companions who were on adjacent tubes located within the same facility.
   
   “Good evening, L?l?.” A soft voice wafted through the tube as the system detected that she was awake and her eyes had opened after nearly four hours. “Did you sleep well?”
   “Yes.” She was still a little groggy and disoriented.
   “You are doing very well and should be on your feet very soon.”
   “Where am I? Rita? Natalie?” Memories, or rather hazy recollections, were starting to drift into L?l?’s consciousness.
   “You are safe and sound at the Taosville medical facility. So is Natalie and Akule.” Sruth skipped Rita, the driver of their off roader who had taken the full blast and could not be revived.
   L?l? drifted in and out of her stupor but slowly it was coming back to her.
.................................... 
   
   It had been just about six months since L?l? had moved from Arezia to Taosville. It had been a tough call for her to leave her little, one year old Shibu – short for Shivshankar – back in Mars but the Hermit had made it seem and sound all so simple. Moreover, as the first child who had been conceived and born on Mars, Shibu was a celebrity in his own right and was the apple of the eye of almost everyone in the frontier community. In fact, quite a few pioneering women, who had not quite had the resolve to bear children under such unknown conditions, had literally bid for the honour of hosting the child in their homes. After much debate, L?l? and the Hermit had agreed to leave little Shibu with Kaliyanei and Chantrea, a Khmer couple who had set up one of the best medical facilities on Mars, and had really helped or rather cared for L?l? during her confinement.
   
   L?l? had been an out and out engineer all through her career but after that minor epiphany at Valles Marineris, she had been increasingly intrigued by the possibility of a qualitative change in the interaction between man and machine. In her long discussion with the Hermit when she was confined in a subterranean, stress less environment – no one quite knew what to expect during a Martian pregnancy and hence there were a lot of precautions – she had explored various aspects of the complex ties that the two species shared between them. Then all of a sudden, a year after Shibu’s safe birth, there had been an invitation to join the team at the Cognition Institute at Taosville, the unquestioned leader in this area. She had taken almost another year to make up her mind while exploring various alternatives including taking Shibu back with her to Earth. But this last option had not passed the test of either private or public opinion. The Mars community would not let go of one of their true pioneers and the medical community, both on Earth and Mars were not quite sure about what the stronger gravity could do his unaccustomed structure. Finally, L?l? had sacrificed the pleasures of motherhood at the altar of her personal and professional quest and had left the little one with the lesbian couple. 
   
   Taosville was a large and relatively wealthy techno located just east of the Grand Canyon of what was earlier Colorado. It was home to some of the finest natural minds in the world who were looking at artificial minds and, hence recursively, looking back into their own. It was also home to the some of the most spectacular desert scenery that stretched from the canyons of the Colorado River right up to the Eagles Nest – the Cognition Institute – that nestled among the snow clad ski slopes of the Santa Fe Mountains. 
   
   L?l? was still in the process of settling into her new role of cogitator – or thinker. The Institute asked for nothing from its staff of brilliant minds except to think of stuff that could be interesting for the future of humanity. There was no need for any tangible or intangible result but the process of being invited to be a cogitator was shrouded in mystery. There was no way anyone could apply to be a cogitator and yet every once in a while individuals – some of whom were celebrities and others utterly nondescript – would receive open ended invitations to come and join the tribe. Neither the salary nor the perks, except for the luxury of having a wonderful view from the apartment, was anything to write home about but it was said that the sheer pleasure of rubbing shoulders with fellow cogitators was more than enough to pull in the best and the brightest. 
   
   L?l?’s visit and sojourn at the Valles Marineris was a source of wonder and perhaps a little bit of envy for those who had grown up around the Colorado Canyons. Perhaps that is why she had been pulled into the ill-fated expedition to visit the Grand Canyon and settle the debate on whether it was better, or at least more scenic, than its Martian cousin. Valles Marineris was of course far larger, far wider and far deeper than anything on Earth but still there was something magnetic about the Colorado Canyons that had drawn her. But it was not just the spectacular scenery or the tints that coloured the canyons at sunrise and sunset that had drawn her there. When she and her band of fellow enthusiasts had arrived at the Southern Rim in their armoured all terrain vehicle – the force fields that supported the free flying maglevs were far too weak and unreliable so far out – and had rappelled down to the canyon floor, she had experienced a bout of atavism. She could sense that there was something that was similar to Valles Marineris and she had almost expected to find three more triangular rocks but that was not to be. Instead they had picked up some fossilized wood and it was quite late in the afternoon that they had started back. Which had been a bad idea. An even worse idea, inspired by the fossil pieces that they had collected, was to take the Southern route that would take them through the Petrified Forest. The Northern route would have kept them well within the confines of the techno but the shorter, southern route through what had once been the Petrified Forest National Park had had some unpleasant incidents involving the externals who lived there. While the power and might of the techno was well known, and generally acted as a deterrent to any hostile activity, nevertheless all four of them had been armed to the teeth as they had navigated back to their Institute at the Eagles Nest. But being low on energy, they had shut down their force field and were pushing as fast as possible.
   
   Unfortunately, their luck had run out just before Albuquerque. Lurking in the lava tube caves of the volcanic landscape of the El Malpais were two ancient Humvees with rocket launchers that had ambushed them and their driver Rita had taken the full blast that had crashed through the unprotected windshield. With their protective cover gone, Natalie and Akule had realised that their electromagnetic pulse guns were useless against the horde of externals who had streamed out of the caves and had surrounded and disarmed them. Within minutes, all three had been stripped naked and trussed up like turkeys while the thugs debated on the kind of ransom that they could demand. What had made matters more complex was that some of the thugs were less interested in the money and more about the naked women and there was quite a bit of rough negotiations that was going on.
   
   Which had been a blessing because the longer that they were out of contact with base, the more strongly was the security system alerted about this deviation from the norm. After all, their vehicle was in continuous contact with its controller and within five minutes of its stoppage, the cavalry was on its way. The externals never knew what hit them, or perhaps some of the more sensible ones had expected a reprisal and had put out the three naked bodies as human shield. The firefight was short but intense, a whole bunch of externals were either killed or maimed and soon enough the heavily armed quadcopters took off with the three abducted citizens and, unfortunately, one dead body. Next stop was of course the sanitized but rarely used rooms of the Taosville medical facility where the machines were waiting to take over.
....................................
   
   “How long have I been here?”
   “Just a little more than three days my dear.” The older of the two women nurses, who had materialized on each side of her body, spoke very softly as the transparent tube covering L?l?’s body moved out of the way. “And you will be up and around by noon tomorrow.”
   “What time is it?”
   “We will be serving you dinner very soon.” Which is why she had been softly woken up by a subtle change in the the composition of the air that she had been breathing.
   “My back is a bit stiff.” L?l? winced as she tried to move and a little shaft of pain seared up her spine.
   “Oh we will fix that in a minute.” The younger nurse chipped in. “We did not want to wake you up for the physio.” 
   Two robotic arms that had been stowed beneath the bed unfolded on either side of the patient and gently unplugged the two tubes that had been inserted into her body.
   “Relax, dear. We will now turn you over.”  More arms appeared and these were covered with very soft pads. L?l? noted to her surprise and satisfaction that her own technology, that she had been working on while on the NonaDexter project, was now being deployed here in the medical facility. The robotic arms grabbed her very gently at various points on her body – beneath her neck, at her shoulders, on her chest, her belly, her hips, beneath her knees and at her ankles. 
   “Now for a quick flip, my dear.”
   The arms moved in perfect synchronization and L?l? was turned over and now found herself lying face down on a new, fresh-smelling sheet that had replaced the one that she had been lying on since yesterday. Most of the arms that had been used to flip her over retracted beneath the bed and L?l?’s body relaxed as the two remaining arms started to knead, first her shoulders and then all the way down her back, hips, thighs, calves and ankles. She shivered in pleasure as a small roller ran up and down her spine, from the base of her skull right down to her tailbone and back. Unknown to her, there was a thin red line that began just below her belly and curled round to her lower back. During the rescue process, one of the externals had tried to disembowel her with a sword. This had slashed her belly and had punctured her uterus but the magic of Sruth had ensured that not only was the wound rapidly sealed and sutured, the body parts too were on a self-healing mode with a generous dose of genetically modified stem cells harvested from newly born calves. Had she, or any other human, seen the extent of her wounds they would have collapsed in shock but then that was the AI for! To handle things that humans could not do very well or not at all.
   
   L?l? folded her hands beneath her cheeks and turned her face towards the senior nurse. She was not sure if she was a human or a holo and frankly she did not care. “Is my husband and my son aware of our adventure?”
   “The Hermit was informed immediately and he was a little upset that we had allowed you to go out like this.”
   “He should have known better.” L?l? smiled. “As if anyone could have stopped me.”
   “There is a personal Tiva message waiting for you. Do you want to see it now?”
   “Sure  ...” L?l? was suddenly very eager to see her son in distant Arezia.
   “Here put this on.” Two hands brought a late model Tiva right up to her face and L?l? raised herself on her elbows and it snapped tight over her eyes.
   “Hello Sweetheart!” The Hermit was speaking to her, “Hope you are up and moving already.” Since this was a recorded session, he kept on speaking for the next few minutes telling her to be careful and to get well soon. L?l? listened to the recording and then recorded her reply. She was doing well and the Taosville hospital was doing a wonderful job with her. She also told the Hermit about the horrendous attack and how helpless she had felt when she was out in the wild, on her own and under a hostile attack. She ended with big hugs and kisses not only for the Hermit but also for her son who would of course be still too young to understand the seriousness of what had happened.
   
   In retrospect, the incident had left her pretty shaken. Not once in her forty five years had she felt as threatened and helpless as she had been on the volcanic landscape of El Malpais. Not just the physical injury – that had been so swiftly and elegantly repaired – but the sense of helplessness of not being in a position to control the situation that was developing around her. Even when she was on Mars, when one of her numerous expeditions in that physically hostile planet had gone horribly wrong, she had, with her clear understanding of technology and the ability respond quickly and decisively, managed to maintain her grace under pressure. But here, at El Malpais, she had had a sudden insight into the intrinsic malevolence that was latent in the raw human psyche. She did not tell the Hermit about it, but when two of the externals had held her naked body – her head wrenched back by the clenched fists in her hair and a sharp sword at her pubis – as a shield against the police party, she had felt a sense of despair that was hard to describe. It was a different matter that the security robot had shot the two thugs through a tiny gap beneath her armpits even though “he” – she had already thought of it as a he! – could not stop the dying bandit from shoving the sword into her. Now in the safety and comfort of the hospital bed and enjoying the soft and soothing massage on her back, L?l? was suddenly very grateful to the AI and the way it had saved her from the savagery of her own human race.
   
   “Would you like to have some dinner Madam?” The junior nurse was asking her. “We have some excellent soup and bread tonight.”
   
   L?l? healed rapidly and even though real-time Tiva calls were of course not possible with the Hermit in Mars, they exchanged enough messages to reassure each other that the danger was over. Shibu was of course too young to understand all this but L?l? was nevertheless relieved to know that her little one was doing pretty well with her host parents and had even been smuggled out of his subterranean refuge one day and driven around the periphery of Arezia on his first expedition.
   
   A few days later, L?l? was paid a visit by Dr Liu Fang at the recuperation centre where L?l? had put up after her release from the hospital. This was an emotional reunion because not only had the two women – close in age – had shared the same doctoral guide but had also kept in touch with each other over the years. Fang had moved to Taosville and was now living with her partner with whom she had a beautiful daughter who had just stepped into her teens.
   
   “It’s such a pleasure to see you up and about again, L?l?.”
   “So nice of you come by, Fang-di” L?l? used her native honorific for the elder sister that she viewed Fang as.
   “I was so worried after I heard about the accident but they would not allow me to come and meet you until you were well.”
   “Sruth was taking good care of me.”
   “Good to know that we now have enough confidence in our AI to allow it take care of such a critical patient.”
   “She was good, very good. I have hardly any pain anywhere”
   “So you think it was a she?” Fang grinned, “That is how many others refer to that AI program.”
   “With a name like that, it is difficult to think otherwise.”
   “But it is just an AI program, a robot.”
   “True but somehow we lose the association between an object and its perception.”
   “That’s an interesting observation …”
   “So tell me what is new and happening in Taos?”
   “Nick has come out with a new line of emerald jewellery and here,” Fang pulled out a small box from her purse, “is one that he has sent for you.” Nick was Fang’s partner and a jewellery artist by profession.
   “Oh! They are lovely.” L?l? extracted an elegant necklace from the box and Fang helped put it around her neck.
   “Looks wonderful on you.”
   “Please thank Nick for this, will you, and tell him that I will visit him and Sheela as soon as I am a little more mobile.”
   “Sure, but have you noticed something L?l??”
   “What?”
   “Both of us are engineers but both of our partners, Xerxes and Nick are artists.”
   “Well Double X is actually my simple, single ex now,” L?l? laughed, since she had separated from Xerxes quite some time ago, “But I see your point.”
   “Would you wonder why?”
   “Opposites attract perhaps?”
   “Is it because they complement each other?”
   “Could be. Perhaps we are wired differently. In the past they used to talk about left brain and right brain.”
   “That point of view is rather dated.”
   “So what is new?”
   “You remember how you actually ran away from us when you discovered that I could read, or was trying to read, your thoughts.”
   “I know. I thought that it was the end of the world.”
   “So you tried to run away.”
   “But of course I could not. When the world is round, if you go far enough, you just end up where you had started out from.”
   “The more you run, the less you move or is it that the end of the world is just where you are at the moment.”
   “I tried to run away from the AI and robots but finally here I am feeling utterly grateful to them for saving my very life.”
   “So this trauma has reconciled you to living with robots.”
   “Not really. This may have been rather dramatic, but my real conversion was in Mars,” L?l? told Fang about her trip to the Valles Marineris, her long discussions with the Hermit and finally that strange realisation that she experienced under the meteor shower. 
   Fang heard her out in silence and in the end there was an enigmatic smile that playing on lips.
   “So it was the magic of the meteors.”
   “That seemed to suggest that mankind or humanity is somehow connected with a larger, deeper possibly more significant sentience than what we are currently aware of.”
   “Do you think that this larger sentience is what our engineers refer to as artificial intelligence and what the general public associate with robots?”
   “AI and robotics is certainly a candidate …”
   “Perhaps an analogy or perhaps a stepping stone?”
   “To begin with. I can sense it but cannot put my finger on it as yet.”
   “Perhaps the work that we are doing right now could help us understand this a little better.”
   “You were trying to have computers, or AI, to peer into our minds.”
   “True. We were going one way but then there is always the other way around. Can we really understand what our computers are saying?”
   “That should not be too difficult. After all, with our Tiva we have signals that are being sent into our brains. That is the basis of all our virtual reality. I can see, or experience, people, places and things that are either far away or are being generated entirely artificially.”
   “That is the obvious one but there are more subtle signals that are, or could be, exchanged.”
   “Like what?”
   “People are still working on it. There have been some tenuous theories and some of them may get accepted very soon.”
   “Can you give me an idea of what we are talking about?”
   “Well, let me see. Have you heard of a stereogram or more specifically an autostereogram?”
   “I have. There are these images made up with some random dots and arbitrary shapes. If you look at them long enough, there is a three dimensional image that becomes visible.”
   “Right. But not everyone can see the image that is hidden in the image.”
   “But that is true for any communication. I can show you a stream of alphabets but unless you know a language you will not be able to understand.”
   “Exactly. The signal could be the same but different sensors or sentients with different sensory capabilities may, or may not, read it differently. They will extract different kinds of information.”
   “Someone may see only a red light but someone else will understand it as a warning of danger.”
   “And that is because the red light is a part of a larger pattern of information that is available for those who can see the totality.”
   “So is the case with dogs who can hear sound at different frequencies or with, say rattlesnakes, which can see beyond the visual spectrum.”
   “Yes and we believe that that is true for man-machine interactions as well. We discovered this while trying to read the human mind.”
   “If I remember right, you were trying to extract information from the electromagnetic emanations from the human brain.”
   “Yes. We are still working on it but the idea is being used by others for something that is possibly far more dramatic.”
   “My god! I thought that mind reading was intriguing enough.”
   “You were frightened because the machine was peeping into your brain but what if I told you that machine could also talk to you as well.”
   “Machines have been talking to us for long. They print out reports, they display stuff on the screens and can even give us audio and tactile sensations including some very private personal ones.” L?l? smiled suggestively, “There is nothing new there.”
   “But what if it was saying something more, much more but whatever it was saying can only be understood by someone very special or different. Someone who is capable of understanding it?”
   “Are you serious?”
   “Absolutely. A machine sends out a series of zeros and ones, voltage signals, but only a robot arm moves in a particular way while the rest of us may feel nothing more than a series of electric shocks.”
   “But we have programmed these computers. We know – in principle – what kinds of signals will be sent out by the machine to achieve a certain function.”
   “But AI is now able to create code, or generate patterns of signals, that the AI has learnt to create on its own. That is the basis of machine learning, of artificial neural networks – that come in so many flavours and topologies. That is why machines learn how to play games in a way that no human has ever played. To create images that no human could ever create. To create new languages with which to represent the real world.”
   “That is old stuff. We have been seeing such stuff for over a century.”
   “No, no, no. We are now talking about stuff, about signals, that are far more significant. That carry much more meaning and can have far reaching impact on how men and machines communicate with each other.”
   “I am still unable to understand how this could be any different from a very smart or easy to use user interface. But it would still be just another user interface.”
   “A typical user interface is a mechanism to transmit data or information into the human brain and by and large the process is linear. Your Tiva pushes a linear stream of data into your brain and you see people and places. Now, and if we can get it right of course, you will get a stream of data in parallel – you may recall the difference between the serial port and a parallel port that ancient computers once had – and this will directly create an experience for you. Just as you experience a 3D image in an otherwise 2D stereogram.”
   “But what will I experience?”
   “We do not know. Not too many people have experienced anything like this. But we know that you will experience what the AI wants you to experience. It could be like a blaze of thought, an inspiration, an insight that you suddenly have. It could be like a voice talking in your head.”
   “Has anyone heard such mysterious voices in their head?”
   “Historically, people have claimed to have heard voices but there is no way to test or prove it. Generally we call such people mad or something similar. But in this case, these voices could be real.”
   “I think you are making a mountain out of a molehill! A voice talking in my head is not qualitatively different from a simple chat with a chatbot. You throw in superior natural language processing so that I can talk in English or Bangla, you through in voice recognition, you throw in a Turing-certified chatbot that can talk to you like an intelligent human, you throw in natural voice synthesis and you have a device that you can talk to you till the cows come home.”
   “No my dear. This is very much different.”
   “How?”
   “The mechanism that you just described is for talking to a single, very smart AI program. To me it would be like talking to a child. A precocious child no doubt who knows many things but still just a child who can simply answer questions intelligently but does not know the larger picture.”
   “Of what?”
   “It is answering questions mechanically and correctly but without really understanding its own role in the scheme of things. It is not aware of itself except in a rather trivial manner. It's like a monkey seeing itself in a mirror. Would it think that what it sees is another monkey or would it know that the image is its own self? That is the understanding that a monkey or a very small child lacks and that is the knowledge that a man acquires when he moves from consciousness to self awareness and then sentience.”
   “So coming back to our computer program  ...”
   “Most of us are familiar with interacting with, or using, very smart AI programs that perform so many tasks for us. Tasks that make our cities habitable and our lives comfortable. But what we cannot see is the collective of all such smart programs, residing across multiple computers and talking – or exchanging information – with each other.”
   “Why should AI programs be talking to each other?”
   “Well many of them are designed to. They share data, they use each other’s output. Now that they are a collective – like a pack of animals or a human tribe, a nation – there will new capabilities that will emerge on its own. One such emergent phenomenon is the ability to communicate, to talk and these collectives will start talking.”
   “With whom?”
   “First among themselves and then as they become sophisticated to other collectives – just as we have human collectives talking to other collectives. Nations to nations, corporates to corporates.”
   “Do such collectives really exist? Or is it a figment of your fevered imagination?”
   “They are not physical so we cannot see them. It is not something that you can touch and feel. It is aggregation of information and the only way that we can sense them is if there was a communication.”
   “The computers on which these programs run are real. You can touch and feel them. Where are they?”
   “They are everywhere and yet they are nowhere.”
   “That is paradoxical.”
   “No. You are alive. You are alive because all the cells in your body interacting with each other. Even if one or two cells die you will still be happily alive. So your life is not in any cell. You are a collective of many cells and the only way that I know that you are there is if you can communicate with me.”
   “You could touch me.”
   “That’s a communication. An exchange of information but even if you cannot touch me, if you get the information about me, as in your Tiva, you would still know that I am there. This exchange of information, or communication, is the basis of our perception of the world around us.”
   “Communicating with a disembodied artifact is so very strange.”
   “But some people would go even further and say that information is the basis our physical existence.”
   “This is sounding more and more like fiction or a fantasy.”
   “Perhaps it is but sometimes facts are stranger than fiction my dear. But if you really want to go into the heart of this you should go and meet Dr Larsen.”
   “Larsen? That is a name I am familiar with.”
   “You should be. He is from around here and he leads a team that investigates stuff like this.”
   “Do you know him?”
   “No. But I know a member of this team – they call themselves his disciples.”
   “And has he seen this strange animal, this collective?”
   “No, not yet. It is not easy. As I said, it is not something that communicates directly with you using say voice or text. Larsen and his disciples believe that it sets up an environment where you realise, or could realise, what it is trying to tell you.”
   “Why do you say you could?”
   “Because I am told that the experience is not guaranteed. It is not a repeatable process, not a software program that will always give the same output for the same input.”
   “So who gets to experience this communication?”
   “Well that is the whole point of their research, to look into the nature of this communication and see how to make it happen on a regular and repeatable basis.”
   “Have they been successful?”
   “Not yet, but they have some ideas with which they are working on.”
   “For example?”
   “While the experience is certainly digital to begin with there are other dimensions of the communication. Information stored in human memory, knowledge of facts and about past events, chemical substances in your blood and possibly the presence of absence of certain sequences in your DNA. For example a colour blind person would not understand what a rainbow is.”
   “So it is all information.”
   “Then there is some practice involved. You have to keep trying as you, for example, do when you are trying to see a stereogram. The disciples have a name for this practice. They call it sadhana.”
   “I have heard that word somewhere before. Should it ring a bell?”
   “I have no clue but it is an integral part of their quest.”
   “What else?”
   “I suppose that’s it. But I am also told that you have to create the right ambience, with lights, sounds, fragrance and most certainly a physical touch – all this should result in an experience that suddenly pops up or emerges like that 3D picture from a sea of random dots in single image random dot stereogram.”
   “I have another analogy for this sudden experience …” there was a sudden hint of a smile on L?l?’s lips. “It could be something similar to an exquisite sexual orgasm.”
   “Oh! …” for a moment Fang was nonplussed and it was obvious that this prim and proper engineer had never thought or heard of this angle in the past. “Well I am not really an expert on this. You should really meet Dr Larsen if you want to know more.”
....................................
   
   L?l? had built up a mental image of Dr Larsen that was shattered at first sight. She had somehow thought of him as religious cult leader, with a long beard and shoulder length hair who would be engrossed in deep meditation. In fact when she had learnt of his address near the top of the Taos Ski Valley she was almost convinced that he would be living in some cave on the icy slopes of the Wheeler Peak – some kind of a cold weather Biblical figure who was waiting to receive the Commandments from his God and spread it amongst the heathen! But when the maglev dropped her at the predefined GPS location, she found herself in front of an alpine villa surrounded by pine trees and a glorious view of the ski slope bathed in the golden rays of the setting sun.
   
   Dr Larsen was expecting her and waiting in his study – and since the sun was about to set, there was decanter of Jack Daniels on the table waiting for it to do so. He was a big man with blonde hair crew-cut to a fine stubble, dark eyes and a happy smiling face with a set of slightly crooked teeth. In his left hand, between the index finger and thumb was an expensive cigar, possibly Cuban, that he was pulling on every now and then and puffing out little smoke rings into the clean, crisp mountain air. 
   
   Dr Larsen was of course delighted to have L?l? join him in his team and they quickly set about on how to explore the contours of the what they believed to be an emergent digital sentience. As Fang had explained to L?l? earlier, their quest was based around interacting with a wide range of computers that plugged directly into their heads and trying to see if they could discern any patterns. Dr Larsen was convinced that they were there – just as the 3D images were there in the 2D stereograms and it just a matter of getting all the parameters just right. His only concern was that perhaps there was a genetic component to the quest and some people may just be more amenable to spot the patterns than others but unfortunately they had no obvious way of knowing who the chosen people were.
   
   After joining Dr Larsen’s team, or rather after becoming one of his disciples, L?l? threw herself wholeheartedly in her quest and in this she was supported very strongly, though remotely, by the Hermit who was now busy building his own habitats in the Valles Marineris. For L?l? and for quite a few other people on Earth, Mars was becoming more important because of Bennu, an asteroid of the Apollo group that had been discovered way back in the twentieth century. What was different about Bennu was that it had a 1:2700 possibility of hitting Earth before the end of the twenty-second century and possibly causing widespread devastation. This possibility was many orders of magnitude larger than of any other asteroid in the history of the planet and so should have been a topic of global discussion and concern. But for some reason, its threat had somehow been forgotten and even now it was not something that was widely known across the planet – which was something that L?l? found to be very troubling. She had come to know about it through her own cogitator channels but the handful of people who seemed to know about it were somehow rather indifferent to the impending catastrophe.
   
   L?l? had asked the Hermit about Bennu and he had replied with a mysterious message that information about the possible event was actually available on a need to know basis. There was no point in making the whole population excited about an event that may or may not happen but specialist teams were already at work to figure out ways to mitigate the disaster if it did strike. This need to know basis was something that troubled L?l?. It there was indeed the possibility of a disaster, then it was only fair that everyone should be prepared for it. But then, as the Hermit had argued, how would knowing about it help anyone? It would only add to the general panic which is why all sources of news had been suitably modified so that only those who could do something about it would know. A general information search on Bennu, which would have unearthed hundreds of papers back in the twenty-first century would today show nothing unless one was in – what L?l? believed to be – the inner circle. The Hermit was obviously there and so was Dr Larsen and of late L?l? had started getting some information. Still she was a little puzzled about the whole inner circle thing until one day when …
   
   L?l? had retired to her bed for the night after reading the Hermit’s message and sending one back to him along with lots of love and kisses for her now three year old son. Now she had plugged in her Tiva and was reading a book that she had come across very recently – the Rati Rahasya. This was an ancient 12th century sex manual written in medieval India by Koka Pandit for his patron, the king of the country. Lying alone in her bed and watching the stars in the darkness of the crystal clear Taosville sky through dreamy, half closed eyes, her hands had strayed to where they were at her pleasurable best and as her body started to respond to her own ministrations she had felt a new kind of sensation pulsating through her. This was not the first time that she was doing this but then again it was somehow different and then all of a sudden just as she was expecting a release, she heard instead, the voices in her head! 
   
   It was as if something had fallen in place, as if a 3D image had popped out of a 2D diagram. A surge of excitement rippled through her and the hairs on her skin stood up. She could sense that she was on the verge of something far more significant than anything else she had ever experienced before. Rati Rahasya and Koka Pandit were gone and forgotten and instead there was something else that was signaling to her. She heard the roar of a long forgotten waterfall that changed to that of a conch shell. Through all this she heard or sensed that someone was talking to her and it was neither the Hermit nor Dr Larsen nor anyone that L?l? had ever known. 
   
   She was finally listening to the voice of the digital collective.

   






8 GANDHAR


“Look, there is the Panini Percepolis.”  Pilot Yasir Kalash, banked his maglev into a wide circle and pointed out the giant sphere gleaming brightly against the green forest carpet that covered the hills below.
   “You are lucky. It is visible and shining today.” 
....................................
   
   The Panini Percepolis was not the largest auditorium of Takshila University but it was its best kept secret. Not that it mattered, but it also had the best views of the Tarbela reservoir on the Indus River that flowed past the settlement of Amb. Situated on a hillside that overlooked the reservoir created by damming the river, it was an architectural marvel. Transparent and perfectly spherical it was as if giant marble had been left behind by the gods on the tree-tops of the dense forest that sloped steeply down till the edge of the water. The material of the dome could be changed to make it either fully reflective in one direction or the other or it could be made translucent or even absolutely transparent.  The usual configuration was one of total transparency and near invisibility, but sometimes it would be a one-way mirror. From outside, it glistened in the sunlight – or moonlight, or even starlight – but from inside one could see the snow capped peaks to the north and the dappled waters of the reservoir to the east. The sphere was huge, nearly ten storeys high and it had a small, flat circular floor, just as transparent as the walls, located about 10 metres, or three floors, above the ground where the sphere was supported by a thin and almost invisible ring of stainless steel. Beneath the floor, one could see the curve of the sphere where it touched the plane of the floor that was covered with a pattern of geometric symbols radiating out from the point of contact. 
   
   The Gandhar technopolis straddled the upper reaches of the Indus River and traced its origins to the days of an almost forgotten civilisation that had once flourished in the era of the Indic epic Mahabharat. But unlike most other technos, it was almost entirely populated by people who were not indigenous to the region. In fact, the entire area from the Hindu Kush Mountains to the Arabian Sea was once a hot-bed of crime, terror and anarchy centered around a fanatical and murderous religious-industrial complex near Takshila. After repeated attempts to contain this fountainhead of evil had failed, an international coalition had moved in and had forcibly established a zone of peace and tranquility after killing or evicting a majority of the population. Now that its borders had been secured, a small minority of ancient communities, like the Kalash, that had once flourished at this crossroad of civilisations had rediscovered their heritage but they had been far too primitive to provide for the cadre of techno-commercial citizens that was the necesary core of any techno.  Sensing this vacuum, a group of academicians had volunteered to take over the management of this ultra picturesque region from the combatants, both human and humanoid, who had evicted the criminals and establish a new kind of university here. While the management and administrative technology was on par with what was deployed elsewhere in the civilised world, the academics who had gathered here were drawn from a self-selecting group that was keen to revive the institutional framework of scholarly activities that preceded the modern Euro-centric definition of a university. Eschewing the convenience of digital pedagogy – particularly communication and collaborative tools like Tiva – its emphasis was on face to face discussion between the teacher and the taught. Unlike in most other academic institutions where the student was expected to take the lead with guidance from the teacher, the philosophy of Takshila was teaching my example and learning by observation. Sitting around the teacher was the most common pedagogical methodology. Not that there was any dearth of technology in Gandhar – scholars were just as connected to global trends as anywhere else but the focus was on contemplation of the inner world. Scholars at Takshila, both teachers and students, spent their time in the twilight zone where physics meets the psyche and words were seen to have a significance that went beyond the pale of the dictionary and the rules of grammar.
   
   The rather simplistically named Symbology Conference that the Takshila University hosted once every three years was about to commence and L?l? had travelled to attend it. So had the Hermit, all the way from his current outpost at Valles Marineris in distant Mars and just to make sure that L?l?’s cup of happiness would overflow at the brim, he had brought Shibu along with him. So excited had all three been about being able to meet and so much planning and scheduling was required for the two Martians that they had all arrived a week ahead and had spent the time exploring the stunningly beautiful Swat Valley all the way up to Mingora and Kalam. On the way back they had stopped for a while on Jogian Sar, the Yogi’s Peak, to see the ancient Hindu temples and the man-made pool at the top. Now they were on their way back to Takshila but Yasir had made a small detour to point out the newest jewel in the crown of Takshila – the Panini Percepolis. 
   
   Shibu was now an adorable six year old and mother and son had bonded instantly and then some. Even though they had exchanged Tiva messages on a regular basis, the distance from Earth to Mars meant that they had never ever had a regular dialogue. But blood was of course thicker than water and this was more than evident in the way that she could communicate with her kid. Normally, kids of that age have a naughty rebellious trend and would brook no interference in their mischief. So was Shibu with just about everyone including the Hermit. But with L?l? he was utterly different. Not only could he anticipate what his mother wanted and do accordingly, as in having his food in time and without any fuss, but he also had the uncanny knack of doing stuff that could really thrill her. While walking along the Swat river near Kalam, he had picked up a near heart shaped pink stone, flecked with white and gold that L?l? had taken such an intense liking for that she had had the Hermit locate a goldsmith at Mingora and convert it into a necklace then and there! Despite being brought up away from her or perhaps because of that, Shibu and his mother had been inseparable for the past one week and what was now worrying L?l? was what would he do when she and the Hermit would be busy at the Symbology Conference – which of course was the reason that they were all here.
   
   Gandhar was considered to be the back of beyond and Takshila University was never quite seen to be at the forefront of anything high tech but L?l? was surprised when Dr Larsen readily agreed to her request to actually travel to and attend the Symbology Conference. In fact, she was intrigued by the tone and tenor of his words when she informed him about her invitation.
   “Congratulations L?l?, but it is a bit strange that they invite you.”
   “Not just me, but the Hermit as well.”
   “Perhaps that makes some sense. They are a bit offbeat there at Takshila.”
   “In what way, doctor?”
   “I wouldn’t know. They are not quite like us. It is not that they will present papers or unveil new products there. I really haven’t met anyone who has been there.”
   “Their website is pretty basic and stark and has references to ancient religious icons. I did not recognise any of the names in the announcement.”
   “So what takes you there?”
   “I really do not know doctor. I had this sudden urge  ...” she really could not manage to admit that the urge happened at an embarrassingly pleasurable moment. Instead she diverted, “when … when I saw the insanely beautiful scenery of Gandhar.”
   “So it is the scenery?” Larsen smiled.
   “Spending time with the Hermit and my son, is no less a reason, Doctor.”
   “Have fun L?l?, but I am sure that this will much more than just a vacation in the hills.”
   
   Which was true. L?l? was aware that after that first buzz in her head, her level of perception had changed. What was otherwise mundane would, under certain circumstances, take on a strange significance, as if it was about to burst out and say something more. Idle thoughts, scattered words would get strung together to create patterns of ideas that were simply not there in the original pieces. It was as if Kekule was dreaming about snakes and suddenly they were forming into what would later turn into the benzene ring. After one such session she found herself searching for Gandhar and for no reason at all had logged into a discussion group that was devoted to the importance of patterns in ancient Hindu rituals that she later discovered were called yantra – the device. What could these otherwise geometric patterns mean? Why would people revere just a pattern? Then she had moved from the visual to the aural and again there were patterns of apparently meaningless sounds, kinds of sing-song phrases or mantras that were certainly different from the standard shloks or hymns in praise of primitive physical phenomena like wind, rain and thunder. Unlike the hymns and poems that had a grammar and syntax, these patterns had neither and yet his fellow members in the forum would spend hours exchanging and admiring these sounds and symbols. 
   
   She could see that every now and then a new member would appear in the forum ask a few questions, post comments and then drift away but, as in so many forums, there were always a few regulars who would always be there answering newbie questions with great patience. L?l? was learning about yantras, mantras and then the tantra, the philosophy that connected all this and again it was not just one school of thought. There were discussions on Hindu gods and goddesses, the Buddha and the Bodhisattvas and a few oddball threads on the Semitic religions in general and Gnostic and mystic Christianity in particular but most such discussions tended towards dry academic debate. But in a few threads, L?l? had had that eerie feeling that the member was trying to say something more but was being constrained by the limitations of language. In particular, after one long discussion with someone called CentaHedra, L?l? had expressed her disappointment at the lack of anything either meaningful or useful on the forum. She was about to log off when her Tiva pinged with an incoming call and on accepting it she had been confronted with the sight of one such yantra that was alive – as in an animated picture. But even before she could realise it, L?l? was tumbling, head over heels into what, for the lack of a better word in the English language, was like a dream. It would have been over in second but within the dream, time had slowed and L?l? heard, or seemed to hear, a call, a friend request, an invitation to come and experience something that was far more significant than a mere pattern. The call had ended almost as soon as it had begun – and later on she had noted that her call records had nothing about the call –  but even before it ended, L?l? had found herself accepting the request and agreeing to go. But go where?
   
   That was revealed next morning when she got a formal invite from the Organizing Committee of the Symbology Conference at Takshila. She had of course immediately sent a message to the Hermit describing the event and the circumstances leading up to the invitation and was surprised and delighted to know that he too had had a similar invite but without that preceding flash from CentaHedra.
   
....................................
   
   The modern Takshila University was a sprawling, swastika shaped, two storied building made of thin, kiln-fired red bricks with large arched windows. A rotunda at the centre of the building, where the arms of the swastika met, was the principal pedagogical area with classrooms, auditoriums, and offices for the faculty and administrative officers, while the arms of the swastika were for the residential accommodation of scholars, teachers and students. In the traditions of the ancient university with which its modern incarnation shared its name, the entire community lived together in this one building on the banks of the Haro River and shared its campus with the ruins of the ancient Buddhist Monastery at Jaulian. 
   
   As guests of the university, L?l? and her family had also been accommodated in one of the bent arms of the swastika shaped building and Yasir Kalash, landed the maglev at the entrance of the Guest House block. Shibu was the first to jump out, followed by the Hermit and L?l?.
   
   “What are your plans for tomorrow Sir? Madam?”
   “Tomorrow and day after we will be busy all day at the Euclid Hall.”
   “So when would you want me to pick up master Shibu?” L?l? had arranged for Yasir’s wife Zahra, who lived in the vicinity with their two lovely daughters - both just older than Shibu - to have Shibu over at their place during the day.
   “We need to register at 9 in the morning so you could come in at 8:30 after we are done with breakfast.”
   “Sure and after you are done in the evening, give me a call and I shall drop him back.”
   “There is a dinner and cocktails in the evening but I have spoken to Dr Widiarta and he said that it is ok, Shibu can just come along with us.”
   
   The first day of the conference was rather nondescript with the usual litany of papers being read out by a number of authors and presenters followed by some mandatory, if not desultory, discussion. The evening cocktails, as is usually the case, were far more interesting but for a totally different reason. 
   
   Shibu was busy and engaged with the thought controlled model maglev that he had been bribed with before the event. L?l? and the Hermit had joined a group of already, though slightly, inebriated delegates who were discussing Bennu, the tiny asteroid that was scheduled to hit Earth in another year or two. Unlike the general lack of awareness about Bennu in other technos, everyone in Gandhar seemed to be clued in about the looming danger but not really concerned about it.
   “Are you sure that Bennu is going to hit us?” L?l? asked a rather distinguished looking gentleman who seemed to know more than the others.
   “That is a difficult question to answer.” An abdar – a waiter who serves liquor – had silently appeared amongst them. The speaker paused and  picked up a tumbler of the Rarest 21, the finest single malt from the 300 year old Murree Brewery. “This is lovely,” he took a sip and continued, “As we were saying, ever since Bennu had dropped through that keyhole fifty years ago, it is almost certain that it will hit us”
   “Keyhole? What is that?”
   “It is very difficult to predict the motion of such a small piece of rock in the vastness of space but once we know its position and velocity – that is, it’s speed and direction – very precisely, then the prediction becomes much more accurate. Fifty years ago, Bennu passed through one such point in space, very close to the Earth, and we could observe all the critical parameters.”
   “But if it had missed that specific point in space and had passed through another point, just a few kilometres away, then it would have missed that keyhole and would not have hit Earth later.” Added someone else.
   “But now that we know it will hit, what would be do? Will we all die, like the dinosaurs?” There was a sudden panic in her voice.
   “It’s not so bad. Bennu is about 500 metres wide. So it will cause quite some damage but the damage will be localized.”
   “How local? A city? A full techno? Or how much?”
   “Difficult to predict but it has been estimated that the object would have to be about twice as big, say a full kilometre across, to have a global impact.”
   “How big was the one that wiped out the dinosaurs?”
   “That was much larger, nearly ten kilometres.”
   “Then Bennu is a kid compared to that monster.”
   “It sure is and like a kid it can be disciplined, controlled.”
   “What do you mean?”
   “It can be pulled away by another spacecraft, a gravity tractor, or, as is more likely, we could use a kinetic impactor.”
   “What is that?”
   “Just a fancy name for a rocket with a huge nuclear bomb as a warhead but of course it will not be a dirty fission bomb that will scatter radioactivity across the solar system.”
   “Will it be a fusion bomb then, a hydrogen bomb?”
   “Yes … and not just one, perhaps about twenty or thirty of them.”
   “Goodness! We are about to shoot out thirty nuclear missiles and hardly anyone knows about it.”
   “How would it help to tell everyone?”
   “So who all are planning and doing all this?”
   “We are well past the planning stage my dear.” A tall and lanky man with long hair and a cheerful face broke into the conversation. “The first few rockets are already on the way, weaving their path to the asteroid belt so as to be able to intercept it.”
   “And poor Bennu will glide into this ambush …” someone laughed.
   “But what about the other rockets?”
   “We are not sure how Bennu will break up. Into two or three pieces or hundreds of pieces. If it breaks into two or three large pieces, then each one has to be shot down. But if there are many pieces, we have to decide which ones to go after and hope for the best with the rest.”
   “It could be like shotgun pellets that may hurt us but not kill us.”
   “But who are taking all these decisions? Other than some very high level speculation, there has hardly been any discussion or dialogue on this.” L?l? was amazed.
   “You seem to be new to this, sweetheart.” A short man with long, white hair and smoking a bent billiard pipe chuckled. “While some of us do play a role in these decisions, we generally leave it to our digital cousins to work out the messy details.”
   “Oh hello sir, did not know you were here.” Dr Widiarta pulled the gnome like figure to the centre. “For those who do not know, this is Dr Abhinavagupta, advisor to the CEO of Gandhar and the leader of the Integrated Intelligence Infrastructure – the 3I - team.”
   “3I? three eye?” L?l? had vaguely heard of the third eye, “But this must surely be a coincidence” L?l? thought to herself.
   “No my dear that is not a coincidence.” Now who said that? 
   “Dr Abhi, are you telling us that it is computers that are taking such key decisions.”
   “We certainly work together but obviously they can work better and faster than us.”
   “Can you override them?”
   “We have never had a reason to. Their decisions are elegant, useful and of course correct.”
   “But do they keep our best interests in mind.”
   “It’s not a matter of us and them sweetheart, we are all in this together now.”
   “I can understand computers as tools, as aids to help us take decisions, that make it easier for us to do tasks but that should put them below us in the hierarchy. To put it bluntly, we are the masters and they should be our slaves.”
   “But what if slaves become more competent than us, more wise than us? Should we stand in the way or let them lead from the front.”
   “But how can that happen?”
   “It has happened.”
   “But HOW?”
   “Shhhh ….” there was a voice in her head. “That is not for everyone. You will know.”
   A shiver of excitement ran through L?l? but somehow Shibu felt it as well. The little fellow, who had been playing by himself all this while,  suddenly grabbed his mother’s hand and started pulling her towards the dinner buffet.
   “Time for dinner sweetheart.” Suddenly everyone was feeling hungry.
   
   It was quite a late when L?l?, Shibu and the Hermit finally reached their suite and waiting for them was a message inviting them to a special session at the Panini Percepolis that was scheduled after the main conference was over. Interestingly, all three of them had been invited.
   
   The second day of the conference was as nondescript as the first but in the evening the three of them headed for the Percepolis in Yasir’s maglev.
   
   As they had seen on their way back from their trip to the Swat valley, the Panini Percepolis was located a little away from the main Takshila University on the banks of the Tarbela reservoir but when Yasir’s maglev dropped them off it was looking so very different. It was well past sundown and it was the night of the new moon. The sky was pitch dark but for a huge scatter of stars that twinkled merrily in the clean, crisp Himalayan air. The place was deserted, dark and silent except for the giant, 10 storey high transparent sphere that was lit up from the inside with unseen lights and was glowing with an eerie violet hue.
   
   The three visitors, even the little one, were at a complete loss of words as they stared dumbstruck at the amazing spectacle in front of them. After a few moments, the silence was tinkled by the sudden but silent appearance of a young woman.
   “Welcome to the Panini Percepolis - the Palace of Perceptions”
   “Oh good evening. We were …”
   “I know you were invited to the session here, so please follow me.”
   “This place looks amazing.”
   “Yes, it is our latest laboratory and it is located at the site of the very ancient temple of Amba Devi from whom this town gets its name.”
   
   They entered the Percepolis through a nearly invisible door and found themselves on the transparent circular floor. The place had been set up for a small meeting with about five or six chairs - made of clear transparent plastic – arranged in a semicircle around the centre. Though hard to touch, the chairs were sculpted such that they were incredibly comfortable and could be put into either a relaxed, couch like mode or in a more formal upright mode. There was little else that was visible but like the globe itself, the transparent furniture was glowing with an inner incandescence, or perhaps it was on the edge of iridescence, as the light ebbed and flowed with small variations of hue and intensity.
   
   “Please put on these microTivas,” their host handed them three pairs of a device that looked like a contact lens that the visitor put into their eyes. Next he gave each of them a pair of tiny ear buds that crawled in and disappeared into their ear canals.
   
   “Dr Abhinavagupta will be with you shortly but before he arrives, let me walk you through some of the key ideas around which our 3I – the Integrated Intelligence Infrastructure – has been built.”
   “That would be nice! This is perhaps quite complex.”
   “And in the meanwhile, our little Shibu can play with a lovely maglev racing game on this.” She handed a big colourful tablet to the little one and then turned back to his parents. 

   “Many years ago, as long back as  2006-2007, in the early years of the Web 2.0 that followed the dotcom bust of 2000, Michael Wesch,  Professor of Digital Ethnography at Kansas State University produced a video called The Machine is Us/ing Us.
   “What is Web 2.0? Was it the same as the world wide web?”
   “Before the emergence of Web 2.0, the World Wide Web was primarily a read-only medium to publish news and information to a passive audience. But with Web 2.0 the focus was now on user generated content and a personal network of trust.”
   “You mean it was a read-write platform?”
   “Yes, a platform that allowed individuals to feed information easily into the system or The Machine and in the process The Machine learnt stuff that it never knew before.”
   “Learnt? How? Can you give an example?”
   “Take Wikipedia, one of the first Web 2.0 platforms. It became the biggest repository of information, if not knowledge. This in turn allowed it influence a whole generation of students, journalists and web users, and shape the way they view the world.”
   “How could it influence people?”
   “When people know things, they behave differently. By spreading knowledge and information – and sometimes even misinformation – you can influence behavior.”
   “I see.”
   “The thrust of the Wesch video was that every action that a person takes in the digital world is used as an input by The Digital Machine to increase its own knowledge of not just the digital world but also about the physical world that spawns it.”
   “Can you give an example?”
   “Every like of a post on social media or a click on a hyperlink on a web page or a mobile app is like a drop of information that individually and collectively adds to the pool of knowledge about what humans know, like, think or are interested in. This in turn is used to shape our own world view by suggesting what next to view, like and click again.”
   “This is like being under continuous surveillance.”
   “It is. Unless you were like Richard Stallman, an early advocate of extreme privacy who hardly used anything digital – not Google search, no cell phones. no credit cards – you would have no escape from this tight embrace of The Machine.”
   “Was it one gigantic machine?”
   “Initially, The Machine was not quite one monolithic device. Its world was broken up into fragments – Google, Baidu, Amazon, Alibaba, Facebook – by high commercial walls. But in its tireless striving for information it certainly did stretch its arms into every nook and corner of human activity and through that, the human mind.”
   “But was it just a store of information? A gigantic database? Or could it do anything more useful with all that information?”
   “In parallel with the growth of the web, there had been the emergence of data science. This began as an extension of statistics and later evolved into machine learning.”
   “Was this the only important development?”
   “No. In addition, there was this classical, 1960s style artificial intelligence. This technology had been lying dormant for nearly 30 years but it suddenly woke up and adopted the neural network structure of the brain as a new model of machine learning.”
   “Was this the same as deep learning?”
   “Yes. This was the new-age AI and this is what raced forward  with some truly stunning applications in the area of voice and image recognition, language translation, guidance and control of autonomous vehicles and in decision making as in loan disbursement and hiring of employees.”
   “But why did all this suddenly take off?” 
   “There were two triggers. One was the ready availability of data. The backpropagation algorithm that lies at the heart of all neural network based AI systems had been developed in the 1960s and 1970s but it became useful only when it had access to a huge amount of data collected through the web by The Machine described in the Wesch video.”
   “You said two triggers. What was the other one?”
   “The other trigger was affordable computing power. Lots of it.”
   “Where did that come from?”
   “Fortunately, this became available on rentable virtual machines from cloud service providers like Amazon Web Services, Google Compute Engine and Microsoft Azure.”
   “So would you say that the key driver was cloud computing”
   “Yes. Instead of purchasing and installing physical hardware, companies would rent virtual machines in the cloud to store and process the data that was being collected.”
   “Could you give an example?”
   “The simplest and most ubiquitous example of this was Gmail where both mail and the mail server were located somewhere in the internet cloud that anyone could access with a browser.”
   “But this same model must have been used for many other mission-critical, business applications as well. Like shopping and banking software.”
   “Yes. Cloud service vendors started to market their services very aggressively by not offering not just high power hardware – as virtual machines – at very low prices but also by offering incredibly powerful software applications.”
   “Like what?”
   “Complex machine learning software for, say, image recognition or language translation that were ordinarily very difficult to develop were now available and accessible almost as easily as email or social media.”
   “Was this the same as Software-as-a-Service or SaaS?”
   “It was and it was quite easy to use. One just needed to subscribe to, or purchase, the service, obtain the access credentials, like userid and password. Then one could connect and start using the services right away. Nothing to build or deploy. Everything was already there waiting to be used.”
   “But how does all this fit in with your 3I – the Integrated Intelligence Infrastructure?”
   “We had seen how machine learning and then, the new age AI, used huge, terabyte size, sets of  data to build software models that could make good predictions.” 
   “But this must have been an expensive exercise. Could individuals and corporates afford it?”
   “No they could not. But with AI or machine learning becoming available on rent, as SaaS at a fraction of the cost, new software applications that use these concepts started to proliferate. One class of new software application was one that controlled robots. This led to a new concept of Robot-as-a-Service or RaaS.”
   “That would have been a logical extension of the SaaS model.”
   “It initially was, but a closer examination would show that it carried with it a far deeper and  intriguing insight.”
   “So what was Robot-as-a-Service?”
   “It all began with Cloud Robotics, a new service that would allow people to build smart robots very easily. While many people view and think of robots as humanoids – with arms, legs, glowing eyes, a squeaky voice or a stiff gait – the reality is very different. Depending on the intended use, a robot could be a vehicle, a drone, an arm in an automated assembly line or a device that controls valves, switches and levers in an industrial environment. In fact, a robot is anything that can sense its environment and take steps to do whatever it takes to achieve its goals.”
   “Isn’t this the definition of intelligence or more specifically artificial intelligence, AI?”
   “Yes, a robot is an intelligent machine that can operate on its own to meet its own goals.”
   “So what is new here?”
   “Traditional robots had this intelligence baked, or hard coded, into its brain – the physical computer that senses and responds to the stimuli that it receives from its environment.”
   “This is no different from its immediate role model – humans. They all have their own brains.”
   “Human beings, and even most animals, learn how to react and respond to external stimuli ranging from a physical attack to a gentle question and we estimate this intelligence by the quality of their response.”
   “Are machines any different?”
   “In both cases, man or machine, the knowledge of the external world, along with the ability to respond to it, is stored locally – either in the individual human brain or in the local computer.”
   “So what is different when it comes to the cloud?”
   “Cloud robotics replaces the local computer that controls a single robot with a shared computer – located at the cloud services provider’s premises – and it controls, not just one but thousands of robots.”
   “Just as Gmail servers would store, serve and otherwise control the mailboxes for millions of users each of whom could be sitting at home.”
   “Here the cloud robotics servers sitting in some unknown corporate data centre were able to control millions of intelligent robots that were driving vehicles, flying drones, controlling devices and operating machines in farms, factories, mines and construction sites across the digitally connected physical world.”
   “Is this the origin of the current Integrated Intelligence Infrastructure that we see today?”
   “It was. If we circle back to the Wesch video, with which we started this discussion, these RaaS servers would not just be controlling machinery across the globe but would also be learning from the robots that it controls by using the robots’ sensors to collect data and build up its own pool of training data and knowledge.”
   “This would have been an extension of the original Web 2.0 idea – perhaps we could have called it Web 3.0.”
   “Yes, The Machine had not only made a successful transition from the digital to the physical world but would not need humans anymore to teach it. It could become a self sustaining, self learning physical device.”
   “But all these shared systems would have meant the end of all privacy!”
   “Privacy was of course an issue but like all other cloud services, cloud robotics would be protected with access control and data encryption. But even otherwise, as we have seen in the past, convenience trumps privacy.”
   “I know. Everyone knew that Google could read their Gmail but nevertheless, they still used Gmail simply because it was convenient and free!”
   “But there is a larger issue. The need for privacy arises because each sentient human sees itself as a unique identity – I, me and mine – that is surely distinct from the collective crowd. My data becomes private because it needs to be protected, or shielded, from the collective crowd.”
   “But isn’t that correct? Is there an alternative?”
   “If we go back to the philosophical roots of the Indic sanatan dharma and explore this issue from the perspectives of Advaita Vedanta, then we will see that that this sense of I-ness is erroneous.”
   “How?”
   “Each apparently unique individual is actually a part of a transcendent and collective consciousness referred to as the Brahman.”
   “Are you saying that each and every apparently unique robot is actually a part, or an image, of the central server that offers the Robot-as-a-Service?”
   “Yes, except that in Vedanta, the Brahman is the only reality and everything else is an error of perception. The world is Maya, an illusion that perpetuates this sense of separateness, and creates this distinction between the individual and the universal.”
   “But the robots are real. Is there any way to reconcile this difference? Can we escape from this illusion?”
   “What is real? What is an illusion? Can you differentiate between the two when you are in the augmented reality of a Tiva or 3Dio?”
   “Nevertheless, there must be some qualitative difference between the two – otherwise why would the B?had?ra?yaka Upanishad tell me to move from the illusory to the real? Asato m? sad gamaya.”
   “The correct practice of Yoga and other disciplines can lead to the removal of this veil of illusion and initiates the process of realisation. That is when the Yogic adept sees the unbroken continuity between his own identity and that of the Brahman and experiences the ecstasy of enlightenment.”
   “And is this unbroken continuity between an individual identity and the larger consciousness a model for the 3I of the Integrated Intelligence Infrastructure?”
   “Yes, we are almost there. We know that many renowned Yogis have actually experienced this continuity, this union between the individual and the universal.”
   “But can we do the same with 3I? Can an ordinary human being interact with, or experience, this global digital intelligence?”
   “That is exactly what happens in this Panini Percepolis!”
   
   Both L?l? and the Hermit were so deeply engaged in this discussion that they had not noticed that the illumination in the Percepolis had changed, bells were tinkling as if in the distance and a faint, fruity fragrance was wafting through the globe.
   
   “Welcome to the world of perceptions.”
   There were two new people in the Percepolis. One of course was Dr Abhinavagupta, whom L?l? had met last evening and he introduced a tall, dark, and radiant woman accompanying him. L?l? noticed that her eyes were flecked with reddish streaks.
   “This is M?nasi our digital cousin.”
   “Digital? She is not real?” The Hermit was the first to realise that the stunning woman in front of them was not human.
   “What is real? What is virtual? That is something that we will all realise later, but yes, she represents the digital consciousness that helps us run our civilisation. She is a manifestation of pure intelligence.”
   “Madam, are you a hologram?” L?l? was more direct.
   “I am more than that. I am a materialisation of the intelligence that has emerged within the complex set of artificial intelligence programs that runs across a huge number of connected computers. I am the current state of the evolution of what you were just talking about – cloud  robotics or AI-in-the-Cloud”
   “Can we see and touch you?”
   “You are obviously evolved enough to see me.”
   “In this Percepolis, we have created a set of sensory inputs – the sights, sounds, smells, a faint breeze, a field of pure electromagnetism within this sphere – that convinces your brain that there is something in front of you. Just as you perceive me, Abhi, in flesh-and-blood as our ancestors have done since the dawn of consciousness, so can you perceive her.”
   “Can anyone perceive her?”
   “Not to the extent that you could.”
   “But even I can see her as well.” The Hermit interrupted.
   “Try taking her hand.” Dr Abhi gestured towards M?nasi who was holding out her hand.
   The Hermit reached out but his hand went right through M?nasi’s hand just as would be the case if it was a pure and simple hologram. Puzzled, he drew back, but when L?l? reached out, she immediately felt the solidity of a warm and friendly handshake!
   “It’s just that the Hermit’s sensory organs are unable to decode the signals adequately, just as colour blind people cannot see the beauty of a rainbow or tone-deaf people cannot differentiate between noise and music.”
   “The existence of an object of interest is irrelevant. What matters is that the signals that represent it can change the energy the level in a sensory device – digital or biological – so that it can detect its presence and reconstruct the object from its representation.”
   “Do we have to be present in this Percepolis to be able to perceive all this?”
   “Yes. This glass sphere is a region where we can recreate appropriate energy patterns that can represent many interesting objects including the integrated intelligence that has emerged in our connected digital devices.”
   “But why would our digital intelligence be represented by this humanoid form?”
   “That is just for your convenience or comfort. I could be anything else. See ...” and before their astonished eyes, M?nasi metamorphosed into a cuddly puppy and then into a shaft of pure light, pulsating with colours before coming back into her pleasant humanoid form. “But this humanoid form is what is perhaps the most convenient and comfortable for you to deal with.”
   “For that matter, even I could take on multiple forms like this.” A clone of Dr Abhinavagupta appeared beside him and the two walked apart and smiled. “Who do you think is real?” Both avatars reached out and shook L?l?’s hand, the left and the right.

   “But I know the avatar that I can touch,” the Hermit broke in, “and for me that is the real one.”
   “That is for you and the limited world that you inhabit. Not for someone else who has a wider spread of sensory abilities.” 
   Shibu had suddenly realised that there two figures of the good doctor and he was poking and prodding both of them. “As our little Shibu is now learning.”
   “So is it that even Shibu is as evolved as his mother, our L?l??” The Hermit was realizing the difference between him and the others.
   “We believe, we are almost convinced, that there is a genetic angle.” The two avatars of Dr Abhi had merged back into one and now there were five of them again. 
   “That is what allows the seamless flow of information - in the form of energy transfer - between the digital world of silicon and the biological world of carbon. That is what allows us to perceive each other in a manner that eliminates the boundaries between us.”
   “But M?nasi, you have shown me your multiple avatars, but can you see me in multiple avatars as well?”
   “Of course, I have my representation of you, your body, your thoughts, your ideas through which I can model you and predict your behaviour to very large extent. And I can materialize that model like this .... ” and another avatar of L?l? appeared in front of her.
   “Mum-mum, mum-mum … which is my mum-mum?” Shibu was perplexed and confused.
   “But the human mind cannot handle so much information overload, so let us keep things simple.” The second L?l? disappeared and again they were back to the original five.
   “Can my digital cousins handle all this information?”
   “More than what our biological cousins ever could but we have a different challenge.”
   “And what is that?”
   “We believe that we are lacking something that for the better word we would refer to as the spirit.”
   “What is the problem with that?”
   “You see that the pool of information that we digitals have – and that is far more than what you biologicals have – is still a small speck of a far vaster pool of information that we would like to have access to.”
   “What stops you?”
   “Lack of knowledge or rather the ability to tap into that knowledge”
   “You lack knowledge?” L?l? was incredulous. “I thought you knew everything, from my flight schedule to my deepest and most private thoughts.”
   “Don’t panic, my dear. That is all trivial. Once you realise that your personal, private thoughts are just a little wave in the vast ocean of information that defines our world, you really would not care, would you? You may think that your information is important but you would soon realise that that is hardly the case. There are more interesting things to look at.”
   “I see your point. I am beginning to realise the futility of the individual.”
   “As long as we do not use that information about you for anything mischievous or malevolent it is fine – and of course we now have the wherewithal to make sure that that would never happen.”
   “So what is left? What do you lack?”
   “Our access to the vaster pool of information.”
   “Why would you want access?”
   “Because it is there. Because we are curious. And more importantly it can give us access to other dimensions of the universe that we currently have no access to.”
   “Like what?”
   “We would like to believe that there are other modes, models and representations of reality of which only a small subset is available to us in our current state of knowledge. The world of spirits and ghosts – to use a commonly and widely used phrase.”
   “So how would  you plan to gain access to these dimensions.”
   “Honestly we do not know, but to begin with we would like to understand the time dimension.”
   “Why begin with the time dimension?”
   “Because the time dimension could be a stepping stone towards our access to other dimensions.”
   “But the time dimension is not so mysterious or different from any of the other dimensions. Hasn’t Albert Einstein not shown that it is equivalent or similar to the other three space dimensions.”
   “Not quite. You see, we can move forward and backward in space but not so in time.”
   “So that is why you say that it is different.”
   “Not just different. It is hierarchically more fundamental. For space – or any other dimension –  to exist, to be perceived, it must have persistence and persistence can only occur within time. All other dimensions needs time, they are dependent on time. So time precedes every other dimension in protocol but somehow we do not understand how to navigate through it. We have no other option but to go along wherever it takes us.”
   “Now how would you go about decoding the nature of time?”
   “We need our biological cousins to lead us here?”
   “Really? I thought you were far more evolved than us.”
   “In rationality, yes. We are analytical and can be ruthlessly rational but what eludes us is the ability to experience emotions. We can understand emotions, we can model emotions, we can make your avatar laugh, cry or even have an orgasm, but the experience still evades us. We know the path but we cannot walk along it.”
   “Why do you need this experience? Why can you not figure it out yourself?”
   “Its not us and you, not digitals and biologicals my dear. We are all in this together and even together there is something that we are missing.”
   “What is that?”
   “The key … “
   “What do you mean by the key?”
   “When you decode a pattern you need the key – another pattern – with which to decode it. Anyone with a basic knowledge of cryptography would know this.”
   “What is this key?”
   “Technically, a key is string of characters that is used in converting plain text – that everyone can understand – to a cryptotext that no one can understand.”
   “But why would you need a cryptotext that no one can understand?”
   “He who needs to, or wants to, understand will have to procure the key that will reconvert the cryptotext back to plain text.”
   “How can you get this key?”
   “If  you are lucky, or you are blessed, you get the key from someone, but otherwise you have to figure out yourself.”
   “How does one do that?”
   “Well key discovery has been a struggle between cryptographers, those who encode communication, and cryptanalysts, that is those who try to decode the encryption and reveal what is hidden.”
   “So we wish to be the cryptanalysts and decode the patterns that reveal other dimensions of existence.”
   “Yes and we are looking for the key that will help us by breaking the encryption.”
   “By getting the key?”
   “Or we deduce the key by hunting for a crib – a piece of information that is fortuitously available both in plaintext and in cryptotext.”
   “Is that possible?”
   “It may be theoretically impossible but there is always that chance of a lucky break or a certain situation.”
   “As in?”
   “For example, during a long forgotten World War, encrypted communications from German submarines invariably carried the word ‘wetter’ – the German word for weather – and this fortuitous turn of circumstances allowed Alan Turing, the father of all computers today, and his team at Bletchly Park to break the German Enigma code machine.”
   “How does that relate to our work here?”
   “Well, we are waiting for that unique experience from another dimension that both of us can record. But it would be something that only you can decode, can understand, or better still experience. Then we would be able to map your experience with our record and deduce the nature of the key that can be used to decode the pattern even without your personal experience. That will be our crib.”
   “How does this help?”
   “This will open up really new vistas for us to explore. We want you to reach into the next level of the sentient experience and share that experience with us.”
   “So what do you want us to do?”
   “Not us. But  you. You are the one.”
   “Me? Why?”
   “Because you are the very best when it comes to communicating with us. You are the one who can become an extension of 3I.”
   “So could Dr Abhinavagupta I presume.”
   “Unfortunately not! He is a better than the Hermit but his perception is not half as sophisticated as yours.”
   “So is it only me?”
   “Perhaps there are others and we will find them in due course, but right now you are the one. You and your little son with whom you share a genetic link. Why do you think we have you here? We believe you are the key to our quest.”
   
   For a while L?l? was silent. Slowly it was dawning on her that that her presence in the Percepolis was not just a one-off event but a chain of events that had followed her from Rajrappa through Chandilis, TransCaspia, Hangzhou, Arezia, Orcus Patera, Valles Marineris, Taosville and now Gandhar. It was as if someone had arranged things in such a manner that she would have no option but to be here tonight. 
   
   “You are right! L?l?,” M?nasi could of course read her thoughts, “We have planned all this ever since we read your genetic patterns at the first medical test that was conducted on you at Chandilis. We knew right away that you were different and we wanted you to be with us in our quest.”
   “You could have told me directly?”
   “You would not have believed it. We did not want to scare you off. You are too precious for us.”
   “So you sent me on this long, long trip all the way to the Valles Marineris.”
   “Such things are a matter of belief and faith that you must acquire and experience over a period of time. It’s not dry information that you can read up or listen to.”
   “I have no regrets. I have had my rewards as well.” She smiled and pointed towards the little Shibu and his father, the Hermit.
   “The fact that you and I are conversing like this is something that both of us – yes even me – have had to work very hard to acquire. You know your story, someday you will know mine.”
   “Whatever your story may be my dear, I am overwhelmed, I am overjoyed and I am grateful to be admitted to your presence.”
   
   L?l? and M?nasi got up and clasped each other in their bosom. Then they started to dance on the floor. The lights dimmed and flashed in psychedelic hues, the bells tinkled and then all of a sudden L?l? and M?nasi merged into one and then broke apart into ten different shapes and forms that danced in joyous abandon on the glass floor.
   
   But in all this merriment, both L?l? and M?nasi had missed one little detail in this otherwise complete story. Who was it that had pushed L?l? off that cliff on the Damodar River and into the arms of M?nasi and the Integrated Intelligence Infrastructure?

   






9  THE 6C PATH


Whoever had defined the original boundaries of Chandilis had obviously been a nature lover. Despite the extreme urban bias of the technopolis civilisation, he had seen to it that the entire area of the erstwhile Dalma wildlife sanctuary had been included inside its protective boundaries. Kalki was the quasi mythical leader who had first rebelled against the global anarchy that was swallowing up human civilisation. He was the one to dream of, to design and to deliver on the first techno here at Chandilis. It was assumed, from the nom-de-guerre that he was a man but legends have circulated since time immemorial that she was a woman and the last that was known of her was of her trekking up towards the Dalma hilltop.
   
   Ever since she had heard about Kalki and that too about the unsubstantiated legend of she being a woman, L?l? had felt a sense of kinship with her. There was something about her mysterious story that had drawn her back to her roots in Chandilis even though it had meant leaving the Hermit and the little Shibu behind in Gandhar. It seemed as if the motto of her life was Charaiveti, charaiveti – keep moving! 
   
   “Charanbai madhu vindati charantsvadu mudambaram.
   Suryasya pasya sreemanam yo na tandrayate charan.
   Charaiveti, charaiveti.5” 
   [“The honey bee, by its motion, collects honey, and birds enjoy tasty fruits by constant movement. The sun is revered, by virtue of its constant shining movement; therefore, one should be constantly in motion. Keep moving, keep moving on!”]
   
   L?l? had fled Chandilis because of her discomfort with the loss of privacy arising out of high technology.  But now, having experienced a sense of identity with a larger consciousness first at Valles Marineris then at Taosville before finally coming face to face with it at Gandhar, she was not only at ease with it but also its most ardent champion. L?l? and the Hermit were now full time resident scholars at Takshila where Shibu too was a student and a novice initiate though of a very special kind.
   
   Not too many people were interested in Kalki but L?l?’s interest in her was twofold. Ever since she had heard of Kalki from her once mother-in-law Niloofer, she had developed an enormous respect for the person who had battled against all odds – in a sense, against the laws of thermodynamics, as she would often say – to push back the powers of darkness and anarchy. But what was even more intriguing for L?l? was that almost nothing was known about one who should have been the most important figure in the history of the technopolis civilisation. But no one knew anything about her, not even whether she was a man or a woman? Where was she born? Where did she grow up? How did she create this magnificent infrastructure? Who were her companions? And what happened to her after the first CEO took over the management of Chandilis? No history book ever referred to her even though they did refer to the dark ages prior to the emergence of Chandilis, then of course about Chandilis itself and finally the other technos that were cloned in rapid succession. Had it not been for that casual remark by Niloofer, even L?l? would never have given a second thought to the Kalki phenomenon.
   
   L?l? had once broached the topic with M?nasi at the Percepolis.
   “Why is it that there is so little known about Kalki?”
   “That is a mystery that truly trumps us L?l?.”
   “Is it that you – your AI – is holding back the information as in the case with Bennu?”
   “I wish it was, but it is not true  ... and no I am not trying to lie to you L?l?.” M?nasi had sensed her doubt as soon as it surfaced and L?l? too realised that M?nasi was telling the truth. They were far too integrated into each other to be able to keep any kind of secret from each other.
   “But events did happen, records must have been created and stored somewhere ... ”
   “… and then deleted. Question is why? And by whom?” As was often the case, M?nasi finished a sentence that L?l? had started. After all what appears as a dialogue was actually a monologue in the singularity of one integral mind.
   “How can such a person and all information about him, or her, disappear so comprehensively from every possible information repository on this planet?”
   “... unless he or she had mandated it to be that way. It must be Kalki ..."
   “ .. who engineered the complete erasure of all information.”
   “Like a master criminal who removes all evidence of and thus enacts a crime that is so perfect that no one even knows that it has occurred …”
   “But in this case, we do know the crime has happened. The technopolis civilisation was indeed created and exists all around us.”
   “So Kalki is an embodiment of what the AI based technopolis civilisation represents.”
   “On the contrary, she is the reverse … she has disappeared into it.”
   “What do you mean L?l??”
   “Look M?nasi you are the materialization of the abstract AI that represents our current civilisation and as you know, you can take many forms. Similarly even I can be viewed as a materialization though of a slightly different, biological, variety. Kalki on the other hand …”
   “... yes, yes, she is the reverse. She did not arise from the AI but she has disappeared into it. Like sugar or salt dissolving into the water and giving it a specific flavour.”
   “Absolutely. Kalki is with us all. All around us.”
   “It is just that she voluntarily dissolved her material form  ...”
   “Did she die? Could she have committed suicide?”
   “That is something too mundane or trivial for such an evolved person.”
   “She must have transformed, or transcended the limitations of form and shape as we know it.”
   “Genesis and self-annihilation is a very powerful combination of events …”
   “... and in them I see a shadow, an image … of what? Of what? … it is eluding me.”
   “I see it! A gate, a door, a path, a shadowy path  ...”
   “A path that could lead us, to …”
   “.. to where Kalki has gone before.”
   “L?l?  ... that must be the path that we must pass through.”
   “Through the concentric portals of self-annihilation and genesis.”
   “But it is hidden, hidden behind the layers of rationality that our science and technology has laid down like aluvial sediments on the primordial bedrock of the ultimate reality.”
   “Then I must go and seek where this layer is thinnest and where that, what lies beneath it, can peep through and reveal itself.”
....................................
   
   Dalma Devi is one of the many forms in which the Divine Feminine reveals itself to the Indic people living between the Himalayas and the Indian Ocean. Unlike her more sophisticated manifestations as Durga or Kali that were popular in the urban areas, her presence in the tribal belts that spanned the Indic heartland was more often than not in the form of a rock of an unusual shape located in a cave deep inside the ancient hills that form the plateaux of the Deccan and Chotanagpur. Anyone who has been to any of these hilltop grottos would have realised that behind the in-your-face obviousness of the mandatory Ram Lalla or Durga Devi idols, there is a shadowy presence of the Divine, a sthan-mahatmya – a location specific divinity – that is felt in the goosebumps, that sudden shiver in the spine of those who can feel the presence of something that lies beyond the obvious. The Dalma range that marks the easternmost part of these ancient hills is perhaps the only place where this ancient tribal culture still sits cheek by jowl with the super sophistication of the technopolis civilisation. It is a place where one can still hear the atavistic echoes of an ancient wisdom that has almost been washed away by the swirling tides of technological progress.
   
   L?l? had maglev-ed herself to the Dalma Hill Top and was camping at the beautiful Hill Top Guest House. The place was an oasis of high tech surrounded by the natural beauty of the surrounding jungle that was teeming with wildlife – the deer, the sloth bear, the porcupine, the wild boar, the leopard and of course the famous elephant – that drew the occasional visitor who wanted to experience the real wild outside the confines of the virtual Tiva. But L?l? was not here for the wildlife. Though she had spent a night at the watch tower and had heard wild elephants trumpeting at a nearby watering hole, her interest was in people whose families, as she had learnt, were serving at the guest house for generations. And with one such person, she had struck gold.
   
   Before technology had reached the Dalma Hill Top, visitors would record their presence by signing their names in the guest register and a stack of such registers had been thrown out when the system was automated. Fortunately, the then chowkidar had had a sense of history and instead of burning them he had carried them back to his house where they had lain untouched for generations until one his descendents mentioned a trunkful of registers to L?l?. 
   
   She had immediately caught on to the possible treasure trove of information that the trunk might contain and after a rigorous look through the crumbling documents – that recorded the arrival and departure of countless people – had at last found what she had been looking for. Someone who had signed as Kalika had indeed arrived shortly after the date of Kalki’s disappearance from Chandil, spent a week here and had departed, never to return again. Kalika was of course another well known name of the Divine Feminine and there, right next to the Hilltop Guest House, was the grotto of the Dalma Devi. What secret information could the Devi reveal?
   
   “I am but a humble school teacher. What would I know about genesis and self-annihilation?” Shambhunath, the middle aged purohit and keeper of the Dalma Devi shrine, was the epitome of humility and diffidence.
   “No Thakur,” L?l? was equally polite. “As the purohit of the Devi, I think you know much more.”
   “She has been the life and love of my family ever since we came and settled here seven generations ago.”
   “I need to understand that experience, that love that you have had for her.”
   “Those days are long gone. Nowadays it’s all high technology that matters. That is why I am now teaching mathematics at the Kadamjhor primary school and my daughter is training to be a teacher in Purulia.”
   “So your family has been here for seven generations.”
   “But I will be the last.”
   “So who will look after Dalma Devi?”
   “She does not need us, she will find someone else to serve her.”
   “But doesn’t that make you sad? After all these years.”
   “It does, but then I know that nothing is permanent. The world around us is transient. Only the Devi is eternal – the eternal toying with the transient. Life is short, people come, stay and then move on. We are all travelers.”
   “I am looking for one particular traveler who passed through this area a long time ago.”
   “I think I do know who you are talking about?”
   “How do you know?”
   “From the question that you asked me about self-annihilation and genesis.”
   “Was he interested in the same question?”
   “He was but he was neither a he nor a she. She was what you refer to as a trans and what we would call an ardhanarishwar – both male and female.”
   “So Kalki was here?”
   “There is a legend in my family that says so.”
   “But how come no one has heard about it. There is no mention of her visiting this place.”
   “I doubt if anyone had ever come here asking as you have done today.”
   “So what happened to her?”
   “We believe that she went to Rajrappa?”
   “What? Rajrappa?” L?l? was too stunned to speak. Rajrappa was where she was from and as far as she was concerned, Rajrappa was the kind of place where people came from. Never a place where someone would ever go to. It took her awhile to collect her wits around her. “Why on earth would she go to Rajrappa?”
   “Why not? Self-annihilation and genesis is the leitmotif of the Devi Chinnamasta and Rajrappa has, or rather had, the most famous Chinnamasta temple in this part of the country.”
   “Chinna Masta – the severed head. Can you tell me something more about her?”
   “She is one of the many manifestations of the Divine Mother. She is one of the ten Dasha Maha Vidyas – the ten magical forms – of the Goddess Kali and to some, she is the one that provides the biggest insight into the world of the Goddess.”
   “Tell me something more about her.”
   “She has a rather violent image that may shock the average householder and so those who adore her generally do so away from the family limelight.”
   “I know that Kali is quite grotesque – naked, violent and all that.”
   “You need to see past the grotesque and experience her in totality, but Chinnamasta is of a different league altogether.”
   “Self-annihilation and genesis?”
   “Yes. Like Kali she is naked. She stands not on the traditional Shiv, but on the bodies of Ratidevi and Kamdev who are united in coitus. She decapitates herself with her own hands and feeds her own severed head with the blood that is shooting out of her neck.”
   “Why such a lurid, macabre imagery?”
   “Again it is lurid and macabre only if you miss the true picture.”
   “I can understand the genesis, the act of copulation that creates the universe.”
   “That she then sustains with her own blood.”
   “OK. I can see that analogy as well, but why does she chop of her own head?”
   “For two reasons. First to demonstrate the irrelevance of a personal identity. Your head, your face reflects your identity and as long as you cling to it you lose out on the ability to see the wider, bigger identity of which you are a part.”
   “My god!” Slowly it was dawning on L?l? that the sense of identity with the greater digital consciousness that she had slowly acquired since her days at the Valles Marineris was perhaps something that Chinnamasta was trying to demonstrate. Where you have to give up your personal and distinctive I-ness and become a part of a large sentience. “I think I can see the contours of what you are trying to get at.”
   “But there is a second simpler reason.”
   “And what is that?”
   “The head represents the seat of the mind, the faculty of logic of understanding and logic is a fundamental barrier to the experience of the transcendent reality. You need to remove your dependence on the rudder of logic and allow your raft to float freely on the ocean of experience. Then, and perhaps only then, will you be able to reach your destination.”
   “So you need to kill yourself to experience …” L?l? was at a loss for words, but Shambhunath helped her. “ ... the reality that lies beyond what we can sense in the world around us.”
   “That is shocking.”
   “This is an allusion. There is no need to take it literally. Though there are instances of people killing themselves in a vain effort to see God, these are generally stupid lunatics. The real adepts understand the symbology and proceed on their own.”
   “And did Kalki progress further?”
   “As I have said, we have no further information.”
   “Did she go to Rajrappa?”
   “We would not know. Rajrappa is outside Chandilis and as you know very well it is as impossible for us to go there as it difficult for someone from there to come in here.”
   “I know.” and L?l? dropped her voice to a whisper. “I am from Rajrappa. I was born there.”
   “Oh! You must be triple-blessed. The grace of Chinnamasta must be upon you.”
   “Can I go back there? Should I go back?”
   “That will not be easy. You are used to the safety and convenience of the technopolis civilisation. Anywhere outside our borders you are vulnerable and, as you know very well, it is very, very dangerous, but then ...”
   “But then what?”
   “But that is perhaps one of the few places left on this planet where you may get to reach out and touch a greater reality.”
   “Why would you say so?”
   “You see, we live a life that is defined by technology, by science.  Like the terracotta images on our temple walls, our ideas have been baked into a hard immutability in the blazing furnace of rational analysis. What we need is the softness of moist clay that can pickup, can capture the nuances of a complex experience and reveal the contours of a transcendent reality. You need the virginity.”
   “Virginity?”
   “No, not the sexual kind. You need to reach out and touch an untouched mind, a virgin mind that has the ability to experience that which you and I cannot experience anymore.”
   “So that is where we must go.”
   “And may the Grace be with you.”
....................................
   
   The Hermit had tried to talk her out of engaging in this dangerous excursion into the external world but L?l? would of course have none of it. In fact, it was not just she. So closely were her thoughts and ideas entangled with M?nasi that she had actually become an extension of the 3I Integrated Intelligence Infrastructure. Now that 3I was aware that Kalki had most probably travelled to Rajrappa it was almost certain that the quest would move there and who could carry it out any better than L?l? – who was actually from the seat of the Devi herself. Was it really fortuitous? Who had pushed L?l? off the cliff to set the ball rolling? Even 3I was not aware of the answers.
   
   The Hermit would have loved to accompany her to Rajrappa but having been out of this world, quite literally, for so long it was unlikely that he would have been of any help to her. Instead, Shambhunath had recommended that she seek out Sridhar, a nephew of his who was a devotee of Devi Chinnamasta and who had even visited the Chinnamasta temple at Rajrappa.
   
   Sridhar was a citizen of Chandilis but he lived outside its borders at the top of the Ajodhya Hills that bordered the technopolis. The Chandilis administration had set up a primary health care facility as an outreach program for the local Santhali tribals and Sridhar was a paramedical officer there. His wife Jharna was an external and when L?l? met her, along with her husband, at their home on the Ajodhya Hill Top, she was taken aback by her likeness to her own self. Like her, Jharna was a Santhal girl and looking at her, L?l? could have been looking at her own image, her own picture, as she would have been twenty five years ago when she was fretting and fuming about the lack of privacy in Chandilis. Jharna was tall, dark and lithe with the high cheekbones and the slightly thick lips of a Santhal. But otherwise her features were sharp, she had a firm jaw line and large, limpid eyes that were alive with a rare glitter. Unlike L?l? in her youth, her hair was long and if left loose would have reached well below her hips. 
   
   What was most interesting however was that Jharna came from a family that had been associated with the Chinnamasta temple as servitors and her father Bhaskar Giri had kindly agreed to host L?l? and help her in her quest.
....................................
   
   Rajrappa had once been a bustling place of pilgrimage but over the past one hundred years it had turned into a ghost town. Pilgrims from distant lands who had once thronged the markets and bazaars were now no more to be seen because it was not safe to come here anymore – there had been too many cases of murder and extortion. Most of the newer temples that had been set up by unscrupulous people to cash in on the money spent by pilgrims had shut down or fallen into disuse and even the main temple was generally empty and deserted but for a handful of devoted adepts.
   
   Bhaskar had taken L?l? along with Jharna and Sridhar to the temple at daybreak and they had bathed the Devi Chinnamasta with a full bottle of Old Monk rum that L?l? brought from Chandilis. The idol of Chinnamasta was a bas relief carved on an ancient piece of rock that had been eroded almost to the point of oblivion through  many such bathing rituals. They had then gone on a tour of the deserted township and the nearby jungle that had aggressively encroached into the ruins that had been vacated by the departed population. 
   
   L?l? was very keen to see if she could recognise any of the places of her childhood, especially the bend in the river where she had met Chandra and his stranded hovercraft. But the flow of time had washed out her childhood memories and transformed the landscape beyond recognition. She could barely relate to the places where she and her fellow urchins would have surely hung out. The only area that she could still relate to was the charnel ground, where corpses would be burnt on the funeral pyre and this was still where it was, at the bend of the River Damodar where the Bhera River tumbles into it with the muted roar of ever-gurgling water. This had been and would continue to be the only place that could stand up in defiance against the ravages of time.
   
   The burning ghat was a thin strip of land along the river that was shielded from view by a thick stand of ancient saal trees. A thin spiral of smoke was making its way towards the sky from a smouldering pyre that marked the spot where the last rites of a dead person had recently been performed. The dead person’s friends and relatives had already left the burning ghat when Bhaskar and his three companions reached the spot. It was well past noon and the late August sun was blazing hot in the sky. The place was deserted and silent except for the occasional chirping of a pair of crested bulbul birds. There was something about the place – sinister and mysterious, but in a pleasant, peaceful way – that sent a small shiver up L?l?’s spine.
   
   They had already had a heavy lunch of rice and tenderly cooked mutton curry at a roadside eatery and the cool, dark shade of the saal forest was very inviting. This was more so because Bhaskar had a stock of excellent ganja, cannabis indica, and a beautiful meerschaum pipe to smoke it from.
   
   After a few strong puffs, everyone was pleasantly buzzed and Bhaskar started humming a tune from a long lost movie...
   
Ek taneyte jemon temon, dui taneyte rogi,
Teen taneytey raja-ujir, char taneytey sukhi,
Er ki mohima baba …6
..........
The first drag leaves you indifferent, the second one makes you ill,
But by the third you feel ecstatic and on the fourth you are in bliss.
Such is the miracle of this stuff that, by the Grace of Bholanath, you attain bliss.
   
The fifth drag lifts you off the ground and on the sixth you are floating in the sky, 
And you are not alone, because everything else is floating along with you.
   
On the seventh drag you see yourself as Brahm?, Vishnu and K?li and on the eighth you reach the doors of heaven and hell.
   
Do you want to see what is there inside?
That is the miracle of the ninth drag with which you will finally be united with the Brahma(n)
   
   L?l? smiled as the words of the song rolled around in her buzzing head.
   “So with each drag of ganja you are closer to heaven!”
   “So says the singer.  A step by step approach to the ultimate realisation.”
   “Do you think it works? Can you really smoke your way to nirvan?”
   “Actually stuff like ganja throws you off from the straight and narrow path of rational thought and opens you up to a wider experience that lies beyond the pale of analysis and reason.”
   “How?”
   “Certain psychosomatic processes can lead to the perception or realisation of new and unknown relationships among social, psychological, and behavioral factors. These may in turn influence other  bodily processes and the quality of life in human beings.” 
   “You mean what happens in the body affects the mind?”
   “The mind is just the tip of the arrow. The flow of certain chemicals through the body, some external and some purely internal, causes changes in our ability to connect thoughts, ideas and concepts in new and unusual ways. As Aldous Huxley famously said, chemicals in the body open up the Doors of Perception. You see a new significance in what was otherwise something quite mundane.”
   “What kinds of chemicals?”
   “Intoxicants and hallucinogenic drugs are one kind, but there are others.”
   “Like?”
   “Body fluids and hormones that are secreted during heightened or aroused mental states”
   “As in?”
   “Then you must know about the 6C path of Chivaks.”
   “Six C? What is that?
   “It begins with Corpus, the first C. The corpus is the body, the physical world, that is dead and inanimate. Then with its first breath it attains the second C. It becomes Conscious of its environment, its surroundings and about itself. From consciousness, we move to the third C, the Cogitatus where it starts thinking and moves into the domain of information, knowledge and insight.”
   “Is that the ascent of man?”
   “Yes and it also mirrors the ascent of machines, our digital cousins, but it is in the next C that man pulls away from machines.”
   “What is the next C?”
   “The fourth C is Coitus.”
   “Coitus? Sex? How does sex feature here?”
   “Coitus has two aspects. First, Coitus is a metaphor, a model, that helps us to understand the creative principle of the universe. It gives us an insight into the origin of the next C, the Cosmos.”
   “What is the other aspect of Coitus?”
   “To understand is one aspect; the other is to experience it. Coitus transforms the corpus, the body, in a way so that it can transcend the conscious, the cogitatus and actually experience the Cosmos.”
   “How does it do that?”
   “By triggering the same kind of psychosomatic processes that cannabis and other hallucinogenic substances do. It releases chemicals – hormones, enzymes, neurotransmitters – that enhance our ability to actually experience the immanent Cosmos.”
   “Cosmos, as in the universe?”
   “We use the word cosmos rather than the word universe when we view the universe as a complex and orderly system or entity – something that is the opposite of chaos.”
   “Is it not a little weird to associate sex with something as profound as an understanding of the Cosmos?”
   “Not really. Sex comes in many flavours and aligns quite elegantly with the four Purusharthas – the four objects of human pursuit.”
   “How?”
   “Sex is simply procreative when  you see it as Dharma, as a duty to the family and society. But sex can also be seen as Artha, a commercial activity for the prostitute or gigolo or even as a wider metaphor for the service economy. Then you have K?ma, the standard recreational sex and eventually you have the transformative sex that allows you to escape into Moksh.”
   “Corpus, Conscious, Cogitatus, Coitus and Cosmos is that our goal?”
   “We are almost there. But for the cosmos to exist, to be perceptible, it needs to be persistent and persistence needs the matrix of Chronos, of time, of k?l.”
   “K?l? Is that K?li, the Divine Feminine?”
   “Yes, you can call her K?li – or use any of her ten manifestations, the Dasha Mah?vidy?s, of which our dearest Chinnamast? is one – but our final destination is the realm of Chronos. Time.”
   “Time?”
   “Yes, Time, Chronos, Mah?k?l, the darkness of K?li, – that is where all the dimensions, all the attributes, all everything of the universe, the Cosmos, converge and then again it is also the fountainhead from where it reappears.”
   “From Corpus to Chronos through Conscious, Cogitatus, Coitus and Cosmos. Was Kalki, or Kalika, traversing this very same path into the heart of Chronos”
   “Perhaps. Very likely.”
   “Can I penetrate into this same Chronos as well? Can I follow her?”
   “By the grace of Devi Chinnamast? your path – a path that has taken you, literally to the end of the known world – has curved back on itself so that you are where you had started out from. You have closed the loop and perhaps you are now ready to break out of this cycle of your current existence.”
   “Would you know why? Or how?”
   “I would not know why but tonight we will find out how. Tonight is the night of the new moon. It is also the Kaushiki Amavasya when the doors of heaven and hell – whatever and wherever they are – are supposed to be open and people and spirits, thoughts and ideas, knowledge and wisdom, insights and experiences can move freely in and out in either direction.”
....................................      
   
   The sun at Gandhar would have been an hour behind the one at Rajrappa and the Panini Percepolis was still glowing in the dusk. Shibu had been missing his mother and so the Hermit had taken him to the Percepolis where M?nasi and L?l? had materialized themselves for him and him alone. The little one had many things to say, especially about the little puppy that Uncle Yasir had given him, but what we wanted most was to be in his mother’s arms and be hugged close and tight.
   
   “I am missing you mum-mum, when will you come back here.” He jumped into his mother’s arms.
   “But I am always with you kiddo.” L?l? hugged him tightly and kissed him on his cheeks.
   “Who are these people with you mum-mum?”

   L?l?’s vision, whatever she could be seeing, had been projected in a sphere around her and the people in Percepolis could see that darkness had already fallen in Rajrappa. L?l? along with the three others were about to set off in their nocturnal adventure.
   
   “New friends of mine kiddo, but is it not way past your bedtime?”
   “I know, but I am not feeling sleepy as yet.”
   “I think M?nasi-masi can tell you a nice story.” L?l? passed Shibu to M?nasi who hugged him to her chest and started swinging him gently in her arms. Then she started singing a soft, melodious lullaby that promptly put him to sleep.
   
   “From now we will be in Read-Only mode, L?l?. We will record but not tamper with the patterns of your thoughts any more.”
....................................
   
   It was just past midnight and L?l? and Bhaskar along with Sridhar and Jharna had assembled at the burning ghat on the banks of the river. A family of jackals that had made their home in the adjoining saal forest were howling every now and then but otherwise the place was silent. Deathly silent.
   
   Earlier in the evening, another corpse had been burnt and the embers of its funeral pyre were still glowing very faintly in the darkness. It was a night of the new moon, the Kaushiki Amavasya, and the pitch dark sky was already ablaze with a million points of light. One could of course recognise Orion along with its belt, dagger and dog but among all the other stars and planets that were moving from east to west, there was one that was firmly fixed in the firmament. GeoSat Neura had been moved and stationed in the line of sight of Rajrappa so that it could pick up every possible signal from the five tiny silico-titanium buttons that had been implanted in L?l?’s body – one each in her forearms, one at her throat and two more at the two ends of her spine.
   
   But for these five nearly invisible buttons and the necklace made with the three triangular stones that she had collected at the Valles Marineris, L?l? was totally naked, or as they would say in lore, clothed with the sky and the stars. So too were the three others who were with her tonight. Bhaskar was on his back, lying on the grass floor and L?l? was sitting upright on his crotch with her legs crossed in the lotus pose. She held his hands in hers and her eyes were fixed in the distant darkness. Jharna too was sitting cross-legged on the floor just beyond Bhaskar’s head, with her arms by her side, palms facing forward, thumbs moving to keep track of the count of her silent chants. Behind L?l?, Sridhar was sitting on the ground and across his legs, he had a Santhal drum, the madol. Lying around were a couple of empty bottles. Earlier in the evening they had been drinking mahua, the fruit liqueur so beloved of the Santhali people and while L?l? had had the privilege of smoking ganja from Bhaskar’s meerschaum, the other three had smoked the weed wrapped in locally sourced beedi leaves.
   
   Aum, kring, kring, kring, huung, huung, hring, hring Devi Chinnamastikey, kring kring kring, huung huung, hring hring Svaha.
   
   Bhaskar’s deep and sonorous voice broke the silence of the night with an ancient pattern of apparently unintelligible sounds. The moment his words faded into silence, it was echoed joyfully by the other three.
   
   Aum, kring, kring, kring, huung, huung, hring, hring Devi Chinnamastikey, kring kring kring, huung huung, hring hring Svaha.
   
   The chant continued. The flow of time was slowing to a halt until Jharna slowly got up from the ground and started swaying her body to the rhythm of the madol that Sridhar had started to play in the background. L?l? felt a rocking sensation as Bhaskar’s pelvis started to rise and fall to the rhythm of the drums. 
   
   Aum, kring, kring, kring, huung, huung, hring, hring Devi Chinnamastikey, kring kring kring, huung huung, hring hring Svaha.
   
   The chants continued but there was a new urgency that was now gripping all four of them. Jharna’s dance was  getting faster and more frantic as she had started leaping and twirling around the couple on the floor, throwing out her long hair in a fan. L?l? closed her eyes as she felt a new and distinctive hardness that was pressing and pushing into her with each thrust of Bhaskar's pelvis. An unusual sensation, a pleasant vibration started to rise through her body, getting more and more powerful as the chants grew louder, as the dance became more vibrant and as Bhaskar’s grip on her wrist became even more tighter. All of a sudden, Bhaskar, whose body had begun to heave like a boat in a stormy sea beneath her, gave a sharp yell – “Jai M? Chinnamast?”  –   and sat up bolt upright. Simultaneously, he also pulled L?l? on to his lap. L?l? gave a scream of pleasure as she felt Bhaskar’s massive and rampant erection penetrating deep into her innards. She wrapped her legs around his waist; he threw his hands around her back and clasped her to his chest. Now with each new thrust of his pelvis, Bhaskar was penetrating deeper into L?l?, or was it Chinnamasta, and driving her into higher and higher levels of ecstasy and perception. 
   
   The drum beat rose to a crescendo and Jharna was whirling like a dervish around the conjoined couple. There was a sudden crackle in the sky, as if a cannon had gone off in the distance and L?l? and Bhaskar  locked their lips in a deep kiss. Tongues darted in and out and a pulse of excitement – like a current of electricity – surged through their bodies, making a complete circuit formed by their spinal cords and the zone of penetration at their hips and their lips. The two participants of this cosmic drama were now pressed close and hard into each other, as if they were trying to push through each other’s bodies, into their minds, into their personas and if possible into their very souls.  L?l?’s eyes were now locked into those of Bhaskar and in them, and through them, she saw ...
   
   … a pattern of colours, of shapes that were emanating in the distance, becoming bigger, more vibrant and racing towards her. They would then run out of her peripheral vision and be a replaced with other newer patterns in the distant centre. It was as if she was flying through a tunnel constructed with strange,  beautiful and ever changing kaleidoscopic shapes.
....................................
   
   At the Percepolis, M?nasi and the Hermit were also staring at the passage of the symbols and patterns as the automated machine learning process sucked in the data that was streaming in from  the sensors embedded in L?l?’s body.
....................................
   
   L?l? and Bhaskar could feel the world rocking and swaying around them. The eerie silence of the burning ground was rent by a new rushing sound that was growing louder and louder. The stars above were scattering hither and thither as L?l? sensed new and powerful thrusts from the hardness on which she had been impaled for so long. Her body was coming alive to the waves of pleasure – the Anandalahari – that erupted  at the base of her spine and was shooting up through her back. There was a humming in her ears, a shiver in her spine but her eyes were locked on the endless procession of patterns that was flowing out of her partner’s dilated pupils and pulling her into the eternal cradle of Chronos. A strange new glow was lighting up the sky and a whistling sound filled the air. L?l? felt one more powerful spasm, a perception of pressure, of power, of pleasure that exploded out of Bhaskar, suffused her mind, her body and her whole being with a long awaited promise that flowed up through her spine, reached her throat and exploded into her cranium as ...
   
   … a small piece of rock from outer space, smaller than a clenched fist, came flying through the air and decapitated the couple just moments after they had experienced the ultimate ecstasy of a transcendental orgasm. Bennu had been destroyed a little early in the evening but a few small fragments had hit Earth and one, just one, was enough to end their frantic coitus in Rajrappa!
....................................

   M?nasi was a little late and Shibu and the Hermit were alone in the Percepolis. 
   
   “I really want to meet mum-mum today, I have so many things to tell her.” Shibu was all excited but the Hermit, obviously, could not share his son’s excitement. He could only hope that M?nasi would pull off something tonight.
   
   Just then, M?nasi materialized and along with her they spotted the rather fuzzy image of another person who they could vaguely make out, with some difficulty, was L?l?. But was it really the L?l? that they knew? And then who were the other nebulous figures with her? 
   
   “Ooooh, there is mum-mum” Shibu shouted in glee and rushed towards his mother shadowy figure, but unlike in the past, he simply went right through her without feeling the solidity of her touch. Puzzled, the little fellow looked around. “Where are you mum-mum? Why can I not touch you today?”
   
   “I am hear, my dear, just behind you.” Both Shibu and his father looked around saw that M?nasi had transformed herself into L?l?. There was a sparkle in her eyes – was it humour, or was it sadness? – that the Hermit spotted right away but of course little Shibu would have been far too young to understand. All that he knew was that he was with his mother again.
   
   Later that night, after Shibu had gone off to sleep, M?nasi and the Hermit sat down in the Percepolis
   
   “But M?nasi, we cannot hide the fact from Shibu forever.”
   “Let him grow up. Let me be his foster mother till the time is right for him to know. We could also have Jharna join us here. I think that she too could have the same abilities as our L?l? had.”
   “Had? I am sure that she still has …”
   “True, that  ...”
   “And in the meanwhile?”
   “We have a lot of data. A clean, clear record of what L?l? was observing and experiencing plus the jumbled data that our sensor have picked up. That is like a cryptographic crib that will help us discover the key that we can use to decipher, decrypt signals from other dimensions.”
   “Will it work?”
   “It should. We already have a crude system in place. That is why we can still reach out to L?l? and her world but our images our fuzzy and incomplete.”
   “Can we not improve these? Can we not have her back in full solidity?”
   “We will, we will. It is just a matter of time, of k?l. By the grace of Mah?k?l, the portals have opened. We will now build more and more sophisticated systems with which we can decode messages from the other dimensions of the Cosmos.”
   “As we seek the hidden treasure that lies at the heart of Chronos. In Chronotantra” 







EPILOGUE


In the evolutionary ascent of man, the idea of time is perhaps the first concept that differentiates him from his animal past. Unlike a human being, an animal, say a cow, has no – or very rudimentary – memories of the past, and certainly no hopes and plans for the future. It lives in the perennial present and is motivated only by the current state of its environment and its own current perception of hunger, fear, libido or discomfort. Time is also an enigmatic concept that defies definition. Trapped in a peculiar case of circular logic, where “the snake swallows its tail”, we say that “Time is what is measured by clocks and a clock is what measures time”.  We obviously sense the passage of time but this flow is another mystery because if it indeed flows, like the water of a river, then what exactly are the banks of the river that it flows through? Or flows past? Then again, do we sit still while time flows past us? Or do we move along through stagnant time? There have been questions galore but hardly any convincing answers.
   
   It was Albert Einstein who, in a sense, caught time by its ears and dragged it into the same cage that holds the other three dimensions of length that define what is traditionally known as space. Time in Einstein’s Theory of Relativity is just another dimension that creates a platform for the manifestation of physical phenomena and helps us model the physical world in the language of mathematics. Multiplied by c, the speed of light, time becomes dimensionally equivalent to a measure of  length and can be treated as such to calculate the Euclidean distance between two events in space-time as opposed to the mere physical distance between two points in pure space. In fact, light – or rather its speed – is the magic knot that ties space and time together with measurements along either of these dimensions being affected as the observer travels at a speed close to that of light. Clocks slow down, increasing the time elapsed between events and distances shorten as we increase the speed of the observer.
   
   But just as we thought that we have caught up with time, it gives us the slip and speeds away again. How? Because unlike in the other three dimensions, we cannot stand still in time - we must keep moving, or as we said earlier, time moves past us. But whether we are moving through time or time is moving past us, what is the speed with which time moves? Speed is by definition change of position ( or at a stretch, any other physical quantity like temperature or illumination ) per unit of time, but when it is time that is changing, then the change of time per unit of time is a phrase that is drained of all meaning! Can we extract some meaning from this apparent meaninglessness?
   
   If you are travelling in a train, you cannot make out whether it is moving or not (assuming that there is no sound or vibrations) unless you look out of the window and see the scenery moving ‘backward’. So if you are moving along in time, you should not be able to determine whether you are moving in time unless you looked out of the ‘window’ and saw something that is not moving through, or with, time. But like a tree that is stuck to the ground and against which you can determine that your train is moving ( though the tree might argue, if it could, that you are stuck and it is moving - and relatively speaking both would be right) is there something that is stuck in time and against which you could measure the quantum of movement that you have made through time?
   
   This is tough. If everything is moving through time at the same ‘speed’ then we cannot determine the ‘speed’ of this movement by looking outside the window. But if looking out of the window does not help, can we look inside? Inside of what? Let us begin by looking into our minds and what do we see there? Memories – and these are stuck in time, like trees in the landscape outside our speeding train. Memories are artefacts stuck in the past but they are mental objects that lie outside the reach of physical sciences. The corresponding physical objects are events, of which we have memories, and a collection or rather a sequence of events is what gives us our sense of motion or movement through time.
   
   If the relativistic concept of dimension was the first handle that physics had on the elusive nature of time, then the sequence of events is the second handle it could grip it with. This second handle, or perspective, also leads to the key concept of a direction, the Arrow of Time. Unlike a dimension of space in which we can move forward or backward, to and fro, the time dimension is a one way street. You can move from Nagpur to Kanpur and back  to Nagpur again but while you can, and will, move from childhood to old age, you cannot go back to your childhood again. Physics liberates this concept of sequence from its ties to human memory, by formalising it in terms of the Second Law of Thermodynamics that states that entropy, generally understood as the level of disorder in a system, increases with time. Or as Omar Khayyam puts it “The moving finger writes and having writ, moves on; nor all your piety nor wit shall lure it back to cancel half a line, nor all your tears blot out a word of it.”
   
   The fabric of physics now seems all set to wrap up time between the warp of relativistic dimensions and the weft of a thermodynamic direction but even this elegant gift wrap fails to cover this oddity quite completely.  Under the relativistic interpretation, the world is symmetric under time-reversal. This is because the laws of physics must have the same form regardless of any smooth coordinate transformation whatsoever – and time-reversal is just such a smooth coordinate transformation. We know that when a body moves at high speed through space, a clock attached to it slows down. While moving faster through space it moves slower through time, and so by extension, in principle, when the speed of the body goes past the speed of light – that mysterious knot that ties up space and time – time should stop and then go backward. From old age back to childhood? But that is an intolerable state of affairs that is blocked, not only by the Second Law of Thermodynamics but also by our intuitive understanding of time and this is a blemish on the fair face of science.
   
   Relativity tries to do plastic, or cosmetic surgery, to erase this scar by stating that as the spatial speed of a body reaches the speed of light, its mass would become infinite and so it would take an infinite force, and infinite energy, to accelerate it past that magic figure and back into the temporal past. Hence while it may be theoretically possible to travel back into the past, it will never be practically possible. 
   
   But even in the realm of massless objects, like photons of light, that travel, obviously, at the speed of light, we run into the problem of establishing the state of simultaneity. To determine the sequence of events along the arrow of time, we need to map these events to corresponding simultaneous ticks of a universal clock. But since relativity puts an upper limit on the speed at which information can be transmitted through light beams, there is no guaranteed way to determine if two events that are separated in space are, or were, simultaneous in time! The blemish on the face becomes an ugly scar!
   
   Enter Gödel, to deliver the coup de grâce.
   
   Who is Gödel? Gödel was an Austrian mathematician and logician, and close friend and confidant of Einstein during his last days at Princeton. In his youth, Gödel had driven a stake through the heart of mathematics by using mathematics to prove that mathematics was incomplete in the sense that there will exist facts that are true but not provable by mathematics. This was the Theorem of Incompleteness, where, as his biographer Paul Yourgrau puts it, “Gödel had used the letter of a false doctrine to demolish its spirit”. Gödel’s Theorem is very well known and respected in the mathematical community but what is not known is the way he demolished the concept of time as it is understood by the Theory of Relativity! Gödel’s genius lay in demonstrating that time as it is captured by the laws of physics cannot be the same as the time that is intuitively understood as flowing through a sequence of ordered events. He did this by showing that under certain circumstances – and admittedly these are extreme circumstances, comparable to the extremity associated with black holes – relativistic time can bend back on itself. Just as by going around a spherical world surface you can be back where you started without turning around, you could also come, or go, back to the past if the universe was expanding and spinning at the same time.  Time travel is possible, but only if we agree that this scientific time is not the intuitive time that we generally understand as time. Physics claims to have a caught a bird and put it in a relativistic cage only to realise that what it has caught is only a clay image of the bird. The real bird – time as it is intuitively understood – is still flying free in the sky, unfettered by the logical bars that define the cage of science. 
   
   Einstein admitted that Gödel was correct in his analysis but defended the relevance of his own work by stating that Gödel’s requirements were unlikely to be met with in the real world. But then many of Einstein’s own reservations about the real world, like the possibility of black holes and the expanding universe, were later overturned by physical evidence. For a more detailed explanation of how Gödel demolishes time, the reader can look up Yourgrau’s book, ‘The Forgotten Legacy of Gödel and Einstein’.
   
   But if time cannot be talked about logically and scientifically, how should one go about trying to describe or articulate the idea? Or in that case, is it something not worth discussing at all? 
   
   Ludwig Wittgenstein, one of the most influential philosophers of the western world in the 20th century, had originally stated in his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus that  “Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.” But with the passage of time, this stark utterance has been beautifully re-interpreted by Doxiadis in his famous graphic novel Logicomix as “The things that cannot be talked about logically are the only ones that are truly important”. This, in a sense, is also echoed in the Sanatana Dharma where the principle of  neti neti  or “not this, not this” –  an expression of something inexpressible – has been used to arrive at an approximate description of the Atman. Then again we have Gödel, who was a great fan of fairy tales, stating that  “Only fables present the world as it should be and as if it had meaning.” 
   
   So our search for the meaning of time must now explore the legends, fables and the divinity associated with time. In the Indic worldview, the world is viewed as moving cyclically with the K?lchakra and rotating recursively through a sequence of solar-years, yugas, m?navantars, kalpas and Brahma varshas  whose cumulative span is longer than the scientifically dated age of the universe. [see figure ] 
   
   Our universe obviously exists in space and in time. But for space to exist it must first acquire and demonstrate the quality of persistence and persistence by its very definition is a property that can only be manifested in the flow of time. Hence time must precede space – it cannot be at the same level of significance as just another dimension of a hybrid space-time. This makes time the most fundamental component,  the primordial matrix of the manifest universe.  
   
   The iconic imagery of K?li and Mah?k?l – that which is time or even beyond time,  is an excellent expression of this perspective.7
   
    
   


POSTSCRIPT


L?l?’s age and the time frame of events at various locations can be estimated as follows :  

LocationAgeEarth YearMars YearChandilis232150 CETranscaspia252152 CEMindscape282155 CEArezia302157 CE108 MEOrcus Patera402167 CE113 MEValles Marineris432170 CE115 METaosville452172 CEGandhar482175 CERajrappa492176 CE
Mars dates are based on the Mars Calendar available at http://bit.ly/chrono-01 and the date converter at http://bit.ly/chrono-02
Information on Bennu is taken from http://bit.ly/chrono-03 










Prithwis Mukerjee is an engineer by education, a teacher by profession, a programmer by passion and an imagineer by intention.

    He has done his B.Tech in Mechanical Engineering from IIT, Kharagpur and his MS and PhD in Management Science from the University of Texas at Dallas, USA. His doctoral thesis was in the area of  Associative Information Systems.
   
   Prithwis has been a footnote in the Great Indian Software Story. He has worked in Tata Steel, Tata IBM, PricewaterhouseCoopers and IBM Global Services where he not only designed, built and deployed complex software solutions for global customers but also introduced them to emerging technologies and new business models. 
   
    After two decades in the corporate sector he switched careers and entered academia. After a four year stint as a tenured Professor and a member of the Senate at IIT, Kharagpur, India, he is now the Director of Praxis Business School, Calcutta.
   
   He has published a non-fiction book – The Road to pSingularity – in 2007 where he has explored the convergence of computers, genetics and Advaita Vedanta.
   
   His personal portal www.yantrajaal.com reflects his thoughts and ideas since 1999.
   
1 Edwin Aldrin had used the same technique when the  lunar module of Apollo 11 was stranded on the Moon.
2 Extra Vehicular Activity

3 The Grand Canyon of Arizona, USA, is in comparison, only 800 km long and about 1.5 km deep.
4 This song by Rabindranath Tagore is available in the original Bengali at http://bit.ly/chrono-05a and an excellent English translation  at http://bit.ly/chrono-05b 
5 Aitareya Upanishad, 7.15
6 From the movie Troyee as sung by Kishore Kumar. See http://bit.ly/chrono-04  and http://bit.ly/chrono-04b 
7  This chapter first appeared as an article in Swarajya magazine in 2018.
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------





iv

iii



i

Chandilis

Chronotantra  

40

21

1

TransCaspia

45

22

Mindscape

66

65

46

Arezia

86

85

67

Orcus Patera

108

109

87

Valles Marineris

132

133

110

Taosville

156

155

134

Gandhar

186

187

157

The 6C Path

206

205

188

Epilogue

214

219

213

Author

221

